{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldItalicMT;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgenericrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab709
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs40 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Yoh\'e1no Apantie\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\fs24 \cf0 Revelation of John\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\i0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\fs20 \cf0 [Revision of April 2019 ]\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\i0\fs24 \cf0 \
RANTA 1\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Y\'e9sus Hristo apantie, ya Eru sen-antane, tan\'e1ven n\'faroryain yar ron martuvar. Mentanes valarya ar sa-carne sinwa tanwal\'ednen Yoh\'e1no n\'faroryan, 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  ye *vettane pa i quetta Eruo ar i *vettie pa Y\'e9sus Hristo, ilqua ya cennes. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Valima n\'e1 ye et-henta, ar valime nar i hlarir i quettar i apac\'e9no ar i cimir yar nar t\'e9cine sasse, an i l\'fame hare n\'e1.\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \
CHAPTER 1\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show to his servants [the things] that soon will happen. He sent his angel and made it known in signs to John [Johannes] his servant, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  who witnessed about the word of God and the witness about Jesus Christ, everything that he saw. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  Happy is the one who reads aloud, and happy are [those] who hear the words of the prediction [or, prophecy] and [those] who heed [the things] that are written in it, for the time is near.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Yoh\'e1no i ocombennar otso \'c1siasse: Lisse ar raine len ho ye ea ar ye enge ar ye tuluva, ar i fairellon otso i ear epe mahalmarya, 
\f0\b 5 
\f2\b0 ar Y\'e9sus Hristollo, i Voronda *Vetto, i Minn\'f3na Qualinallon, ar i Tur aranion cemeno. Yen mele vi ar eleryanie vi \'facarilvallon v\'e9ra serceryanen 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  \'96 ar vi-carne aranie, airimor Ainoryan ar Ataryan \'96 na sen i alcar ar i t\'fare tennoio! N\'e1sie!\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 4 
\f3\b0 John to the seven congregations in Asia: Grace and peace to you from [the one] who is and who was and who shall come, and from the seven spirits that are before his throne, 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  and from Jesus Christ, the Faithful Witness, the Firstborn out of the Dead, and the Ruler of [the] kings of earth.
\f2\i0  
\f3\i To [the one] who loves us and who has freed us from our sins with his own blood 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  \'96 and made us a kingdom, priests for his God and his Father \'96 be to him the glory and the power forever! Amen!
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Y\'e9! T\'falas as i fanyar, ar ilya hen cenuva se, y\'fa i *terner se; ar ilye nossi cemeno palpuvar inte nairesse issenen. N\'e1, n\'e1sie!\
	
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  \'93Inye Tinco ar \'dare,\'94 quete i H\'e9ru Eru, \'93i ea ar i enge ar i tuluva, i Iluvala.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 7
\f2\b0  
\f3\i Behold! He is coming with the clouds, and every eye shall see him, also those who pierced him; and all tribes of earth shall beat themselves in grief because of him. Yes, amen!
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 	
\f0\i0\b 8
\f2\b0  
\f3\i \'93I am Tinco and \'dare [= Alpha and Omega]\'94, says the L\'f3rd God, \'93[the one] who is and who was and who shall come, the Almighty.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Inye Yoh\'e1no, h\'e1nolda ye same ranta aselde i \uc0\u351 angiesse ar araniesse ar voronwiesse mi Y\'e9sus, enge i tollosse estaina Patmos queti\'e9nen pa Eru ar *vetti\'e9nen pa Y\'e9sus. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  I H\'e9ruo auresse anen fairesse, ar hlassen ca ni taura \'f3ma ve hy\'f3lallo, 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93Teca ya cenil parmasse ar \'e1sa menta i ocombennar otso, mi Efesus ar Mirna ar Peryamum ar \cf2 \uc0\u350 \cf0 iat\'edra ar Sardis ar Filarelfia ar Laoricea.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 9
\f3\b0  I John, your brother who has a share with you in the tribulation and the kingdom and the faithfulness in Jesus, was on the island called Patmos because of speaking about God and because of witnessing about Jesus. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  On the day of the Lord I was in spirit, and I heard behind me a mighty voice like from a trumpet, 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  saying: \'93Write [that] which you see in a book and send it to the seven congregations, in Ephesus and Smyrna and Pergamum and Thyatira and Sardis and Philadelphia and Laodicea.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Quernen immo cenien mano \'f3ma quente ninna, ar apa querie cennen calmatarmar otso maltava, 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  ar i endesse i calmatarmaron qu\'e9n ve atanyondo, vaina vaimasse ya rahtane talyanta ar  arwa laurea quilto n\'fatina *os i ambas. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ente, carya ar findelerya n\'e1ner ninqui ve ninque t\'f3, ve losse, ar henyat ve uruite ruine.\
\

\f1\i\b 12 
\f3\b0 I turned [Q: I turned myself] to see whose voice spoke to me, and after turning I saw seven lampstands of gold, 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  and in the midst of the lampstands one [or, a person] like a son of man, clad in a robe that reached to his feet and having a golden belt bound about the chest.
\f2\i0  
\f1\i\b 14
\f3\b0  Furthermore, his head and his hair were white like white wool, like snow, and his eyes like a fiery flame.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 15
\f2\b0  Talyat n\'e1net ve laurea urus, l\'fa\uc0\u351 ina urnasse, ar \'f3marya n\'e1ne ve i lamma rimbe nenion. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Formaryasse s\'e1mes tinwi otso; et antoryallo lende aica andamacil arwa c\'edma atto. Cendelerya calle ve \'edre Anar cala t\'fareryasse. 
\f0\b 17 
\f2\b0 \'cdre cennenyes lantanenye ve qualina epe talyat. Panyanes formarya to ni ar quente: \'93\'c1va ruce! Inye i Minya ar i M\'e9tima 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  ar i coirea n\'e1; ar anen qualina, mal y\'e9! nanye coirea tennoio ar oi, ar samin i *latili \'f1uruo ar Mandosto.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 15
\f3\b0  His feet were like gold-colored copper, glowing in an oven [or, furnace], and his voice was like the sound of many waters. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  In his right hand he had seven stars; out of his mouth went a sharp, two-edged  longsword having two edges. His face shone as when the Sun shines in its power.
\f2\i0  
\f1\i\b 17
\f3\b0  When I saw him I fell like dead before his feet. He put his right hand on me and said: \'93Do not fear! I am the First and the Last 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  and the living; and I was dead, but behold! I am alive forever and ever, and I have the keys to death and to Mandos [here used = Hades, the realm of the dead].
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 19
\f2\b0  Etta teca yar ec\'e9niel, yar ear s\'ed ar yar martuvar apa si v\'e9la. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Pa i f\'f3le i tinwion otso yar cennel formanyasse, ar i calmatarmaron otso: i tinwi otso nar vali i ocombion otso, ar i calmatarmar otso nar i ocombi otso.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 19
\f3\b0  Therefore write [the things] that you have seen, [the ones] that are now and [the ones] that shall happen after this alike. 
\f1\b 20
\f2\i0\b0  
\f3\i About [or, As for] the secret of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand, and of the seven lampstands: the seven stars are angels of the seven congregations, and the seven lampstands are the seven congregations.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 2\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 \'93I valanna i ocombeo Efesusse teca: Sin quete ye same i tinwi otso formaryasse, ye vanta endesse i calmatarmaron otso maltava:\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 2\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
To the angel of the congregation in Ephesus write: This says [he] who has the seven stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the seven lampstands of gold:\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 2
\f2\b0  Istan cardalyar ar molielya ar voronwielya, ar i ual pole cole ulce queni, ar i atyastiel i quetir i nalte aposteli, mal uar, ar hirnel i hurilte. 
\f0\b 3 
\f2\b0 Y\'fa voronwie samil, ar anaiel \uc0\u351 orna essenyan, ar ual ol\'f3lie lumba. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ananta samin ana lye i ehehtiel i melme ya s\'e1mel i yestasse.\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 2
\f3\b0  I know your deeds and your labour and your faithfulness, and that you cannot bear evil people, and that you have tried [the ones] who say that they are apostles, but are not, and you have found that they lie. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  Also endurance you have, and you have been steadfast for [the sake of] my name, and you have not become tired.
\f1\b  4
\f3\b0  And yet I have against you that you have forsaken the love that you had in the beginning.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Etta enyala yallo alantiel, ar hira inwis ar cara i minye cardar. Qui lalye, t\'falan lenna, ar mapuvan oa calmatarmalya n\'f3meryallo, qui ual hire inwis. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ananta \'e9 samil si, i tevil i cardar i Nicolaiyaron, yar y\'fa inye teve. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar: Yen same i apaire antauvan mate i Aldallo Coivi\'e9va, ya ea i tarwasse Eruva.\
\

\f1\i\b 5
\f3\b0  Therefore remember [that] which you have fallen from, and find repentance and do the first deeds. If you do not, I am coming to you, and I shall take away your lampstand from its place, if you do not find repentance. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  And yet you do have this, that you hate the doings of the Nicolaitans, which also I loathe. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  May [the one] who has an ear hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations: To [him] who conquers I shall give [permission] to eat from the Tree of Life, which is in the garden of God.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar i valanna i ocombeo Mirnasse teca: Sin quete i Minya ar i M\'e9tima, ye n\'e1ne qualina ar nanwenne coivienna: 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Istan \uc0\u351 angielya ar \'fanielya \'96 mal nalye l\'e1rea \'96 ar i yaiwe ion estar inte Y\'farar, ananta ualte, mal nar S\'e1tano *yomencoa: 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  \'c1va ruce i \'f1walmallon yar s\'ed tuluvar lyenna. Y\'e9! I Arauco s\'ed hatuva ennoli mici le mir mando, n\'e1veldan aqua tyastane, ar i samuvalde \uc0\u351 angie ter r\'ed quean. Na voronda tenna \'f1uru, ar lyen-antauvan i r\'ede coivi\'e9va. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar: Ye turue laume nauva malana i attea \'f1urunen.\
\

\f1\i\b 8
\f3\b0  And to the angel of the congregation in Smyrna write: This says the First and the Last, who was dead and came back to life:
\f2\i0  
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  
\f3\i I know your tribulation and your poverty \'96 but you are rich \'96 and the mockery of [those] who call themselves Jews, and yet they are not, but are Satan\'92s synagogue: 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Do not fear the torments that now will come upon you. Look! The Devil [or, Demon] will now throw some [lit. \'93some persons\'94, 
\f1\b ennoli
\f3\b0 ] among you into prison, for you to be wholly tested, and that you will have tribulation for [lit. through] ten days [
\f1\b r\'ed
\f3\b0 , pl. of 
\f1\b r\'e9
\f3\b0 ]. Be faithful until death, and I shall give you the crown of life.
\f2\i0  
\f3\i May he who has an [ear] hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations: [He] who has victory will by no means be harmed by the second death.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ar i valanna i ocombeo Peryamumesse teca: Sin quete ye same i aica andamacil arwa c\'edma atto: 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Istan masse marilye, yasse ea i tarhanwa S\'e1tanwa; ananta h\'e9pal essenya. Ual lalane savielya nisse yando mi r\'e9ryar Antipas voronda *vettonya, ye n\'e1ne nanca ara lye, yasse mare S\'e1tan.\
\

\f1\i\b 12 
\f3\b0 And to the angel of the congregation in Pergamum write: This says [he] who has the sharp longsword having two edges: 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  I know where you dwell, [the place] in which the throne of Satan is; and yet you are keeping my name. You did not deny your faith in me also [or, even] in the days of Antipas my faithful witness, who was slain by your side, where Satan dwells.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0   Ananta samin n\'f3time nattoli ana lye, in ear aselye i hepir i peantave Valamo, ye peantane Valacen panie sar talti\'e9va epe Israelindi, ar sie mantelte yar n\'e1ner *y\'e1cine cordonin ar *hrupuhtaner. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Sie ear y\'fa aselye i hepir i peantave i Nicolaiyaron. 
\f0\b 16 
\f2\b0 Etta hira inwis! Qui lalye, tuluvan lyenna ron, ar mahtuvan t\'e9na antonyo macilden.\
\

\f1\i\b 14
\f3\b0  And yet I hold a few matters against you, that there are with you [those] who keep the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling block [
\f1\b sar talti\'e9va
\f3\b0 , a stone of slipping/collapsing] before the sons of Israel, and so they ate [things] that were sacrificed to idols and fornicated. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  Thus there are also with you [those] who keep the teaching of the Nicolaitans. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  Therefore find repentance! If you do not, I will come to you soon, and I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar: Yen turue antauvan i nurtana \ul m\'e1no\ulnone , ar antauvan sen ninque sar, ar to i sar vinya esse l\'e1 sinwa aiquenen, hequa ye came sa.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 17
\f3\b0  May he who has an ear hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations: To [him] who conquers I shall give [some] of the hidden \ul m\'e1n
\f2\i0 \ulnone  
\f3\i [manna], and I shall give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name not known to anyone, except [the one] who receives it.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Ar i valanna i ocombeo \cf2 \uc0\u350 \cf0 iat\'edrasse teca: Sin quete i Eruion, ye same henyat ve uruite ruine, ar talyat ve urus: 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Istan cardalyar ar melmelya ar savielya ar n\'faromolielya ar voronwielya, ar anvinye cardalyar nar ambe l\'e1 i minyar.\
\

\f1\i\b 18
\f3\b0  And to the angel of the congregation in Thyatira write: This says the Son of God, who has his eyes like a fiery flame, and his feet like copper: 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  I know your deeds and your love and your faith and your service [lit. servant-work] and your faithfulness, and your newest deeds are more than the first ones.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Ananta samin ana lye in ual pusta i n\'eds Yesavel, ye esta immo *Eruterc\'e1ne, ar peantas ar tyaris ranya n\'faronyar mir carie *\'fapuhtale, ar matie nati *y\'e1cine cordonin. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Antanen sen l\'fame hirien inwis, mal uas mere cesta inwis pa *hrupuhtalerya. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Y\'e9! Hatuvanyes mir caima, ar i *hrupuhtar \'f3se mir t\'fara \uc0\u351 angie, qui ualte hire inwis pa cardaryar. 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Ar h\'ednaryar lavuvan \'f1urun mapa, tyarien ilye i ocombi ista in inye n\'e1 ye ce\uc0\u351 e s\'e1mar ar endar, ar antauvan ilquenen mici le ve cardaldar nar.\
\

\f1\i\b 20
\f3\b0  And yet I hold against you that you do not stop the woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophet [a heraldess of God], and teaches and causes to err my servants into doing [/committing] fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to idols.
\f2\i0  
\f1\i\b 21
\f3\b0  I gave her time to find repentance, but she does not want to seek repentance for [
\f1\b pa 
\f3\b0 = about] her fornication. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  Look! I throw her into bed, and [the ones] who fornicate with her into a great tribulation, if they do find repentance concerning her deeds. 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  And her children I will let death take, to cause all the congregations to know that I am [the one] who searches minds and hearts, and I shall give to everyone among you according as your deeds are.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 24
\f2\b0  Mal quetin i exennar mici le \cf2 \uc0\u350 \cf0 iat\'edrasse, illinnar i uar same peantave sina ar uar isistie 'i tumne nati S\'e1tano', ve quetilte: Uan panya lesse hyana c\'f3lo. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Ananta hepa ya samil, tenna tuluvan. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Ar ye turue ar cime cardanyar tenna i metta, sen antauvan h\'e9re or n\'f3ri.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 24
\f3\b0  But I say to the others among you in Thyatira, to all who do not have this teaching and have not known \'91the deep things of Satan\'92, as they say: I do not put on you [any] other burden. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  And yet, keep what you have, until I shall come. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  And [he] who conquers and heeds my deeds until the end, to him I shall give him lordship over [the] nations.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 27
\f2\b0  Turuvas tai angaina vandilden, n\'e1veltan r\'e1cine mir mittar ve cemne veni \'96 i imya h\'e9re ya inye ac\'e1mie Atarinyallo. 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Ar antauvan sen i arintinwe. 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 27
\f3\b0  He shall rule them with an iron rod, for them to be broken into pieces like earthen vessels \'96 the same lordship [or, authority] that I have received from my Father. 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  And I shall give him the morning star. 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  May [the one] who has an ear hear what the Spirit says to the congregations!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 3\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 \'93Ar i valanna i ocombeo Sardisse teca: Sin quete ye same i fairi otso Eruva ar i tinwi otso: Istan cardalyar, i nalye coirea essenen \'96 mal nalye qualina.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 3\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93And to the angel of the congregation in Sardis write: This says [he] who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars: I know your deeds, that you are alive by name \'96 but you are dead.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 2
\f2\b0  Ola cuiva ar \'e1 turya i nati lemyala yar nar hari qualmenna, an uan ih\'edrie cardalyar telyane epe Ainonya. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Etta enyala manen ac\'e1miel ar manen hlassel, ar \'e1sa hepe, ar hira inwis! Qui ual oluva cuiva, tuluvan ve arpo, ar laume istuval i l\'fame yasse tuluvan lyenna.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 2 
\f3\b0 Become awake and strengthen the things remaining that are near to death, for I have not found your deeds completed before my God. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  Therefore recall how you have received and how you heard, and keep it, and find repentance! If  you do not become awake, I shall come like a thief, and you will by no means know the hour in which I shall come upon you.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ananta \'e9 samil ann\'f3time esseli Sardisse i uar avahtie lanneltar, ar vantuvalte asinye mi ninque, an nalte valde. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ye turue nauva sie vaina ninqui lannel\'ednen, ar laume mapuvan oa esserya i Parmallo Coivi\'e9va, mal caruvan sinwa in esserya n\'e1 istanwa lo ni epe Atarinya ar epe valaryar. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar!\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i \cf0 4
\f3\b0  And yet you do have a few names in Sardis who have not stained their clothes, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  [He] who has victory will thus be clad in white clothes, and I shall by no means take away his name from the Book of Life, but I shall make known that his name is acknowledged by me before my Father and before his angels . 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  May [he] who has a hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations!
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 7
\f2\b0  Ar i valanna i ocombeo Filarelfiasse teca: Sin quete ye aire n\'e1, ye \uc0\u351 anda n\'e1, ye same Laviro *latil, ye latya mi l\'e9 pustala aiquen holtiello, ar holta mi l\'e9 pustala aiquen latyavello: 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Istan cardalyar \'96 y\'e9! ap\'e1nien epe lye latyana fenna, ya *\'faquen pole holta. An elye same pitya melehte, mal hempel quettanya ar ua lalane essenya.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 7
\f3\b0  And to the angel of the congregation in Philadelphia write: This says [he] who is holy, who is true, who has David\'92s key, who opens in a manner stopping anyone from closing, and closes in a manner stopping anyone from opening: 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  I know your deeds \'96 behold! I have placed before you an opened door, which nobody can close. For you have little might, but you kept my word and did not deny my name.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 9
\f2\b0  Y\'e9! I queni *yomencoallo S\'e1tanwa, i estar inte Y\'farar ananta uar, mal h\'farar \'96 y\'e9! tyaruvanyet tule ar lanta undu epe talulyat, ar tyaruvanyet ista i em\'e9lien lye. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Pan eh\'e9piel i quetta voronwienyo, y\'fa inye lye-hepuva i l\'famello tyasti\'e9va ya tuluva i quanda ambarenna, tyastien i marir cemende. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Tuluvan ron. Hepa ya samil, pustien aiquen mapiello r\'edelya.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 9
\f3\b0  Behold! The people from the synagogue of Satan, who call themselves Jews and yet are not, but are lying \'96 behold! I shall cause them to come and fall down before your feet, and I shall make them know that I have loved you. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Because you have kept the word of my faithfulness, I too will keep you from the hour of trial that shall come upon the whole world, to test those who dwell on earth. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  I will come soon. Keep [that] which you have, to stop anyone from taking your crown.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 12
\f2\b0  Ye turue caruvan tarma i cordasse Ainonyava, ar laume oi etelelyuvas, ar tecuvan sesse i esse Ainonyava ar i esse i osto Ainonyava, i vinya Yer\'fasalem ya tule undu menello Ainonyallo, ar y\'fa ninya vinya esse. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar!\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 12
\f3\b0  [He] who conquers I shall make a pillar in the temple of my God, and by no means will he ever go out, and I will write upon him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven from my God, and also my own new name. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  May [he] who has an ear hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations!
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 14
\f2\b0  Ar i valanna i ocombeo Laoriceasse teca: Sin quete i N\'e1sie, i voronda ar \uc0\u351 anda *Vetto, i Yesta onti\'e9no Eruo: 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Istan cardalyar, in ual ringa hya lauca. Auve anel ringa hya lauca! 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Etta, pan nalye *pellauca, ar l\'e1 lauca hya ringa, quamuvanyel et antonyallo. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Pan quetil: \'93Nanye l\'e1rea, nanye herenya; samin maure muntava\'94 \'96 mal ual ista in elye angayanda ar *nainima ar \'fana ar *c\'e9nel\'f3ra ar helda n\'e1 \'96 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  quetin lyenna i caril mai qui mancal nillo malta poitana n\'e1renen, n\'e1velyan l\'e1rea, ar ninqui larmar, n\'e1velyan vaina ar pustien heldielyo nucumnie n\'e1vello tanana, ar laive panien hendulyatse, cenielyan.\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 14
\f3\b0  And to the angel of the congregation in Laodicea write: Thus says the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, [the] Beginning of [the] creation of God: 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  I know your deeds, that you are not cold or hot. Would that you were cold or hot! 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  Therefore, since you are lukewarm, and not hot or cold, I shall vomit you out of my mouth.
\f2\i0  
\f1\i\b 17
\f3\b0  Since you say: \'93I am rich, I am wealthy; I have need of nothing\'94 \'96 but you do not know that you are miserable and lamentable and destitute and blind and naked \'96 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  I say to you that you do well if you buy [lit. trade] from me gold purified by fire, for you to be rich, and white garments, for you to be clad and to stop the humiliation of your nakedness from being shown, and salve to put on your eyes, for you to see.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 19
\f2\b0  Illin i melin inye anta naitie ar paimesta. Etta \'e1 lenga holmo, ar hira inwis! 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Y\'e9! T\'e1ran epe i fenna, tambala. Qui aiquen hlare \'f3manya ar latya i fenna, tuluvan mir coarya, ar matuvan i *\uc0\u351 inyemat \'f3se, ar isse asinye. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Yen turue antauvan hame undu \'f3ni mahalmanyasse, tambe inye turune ar hamune as Atarinya mahalmaryasse. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Nai ye same hlas hlaruva ya i Faire quete i ocombennar!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 19
\f3\b0  To all that I love I give rebuke and chastisement. Therefore behave sincerely, and find repentance! 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  Behold! I am standing before the door, knocking. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I shall come into his house, and I shall eat the evening meal with him and he with me. 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  To [him] who conquers I shall give [permission] to sit down with me on my throne, like I conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  May [he] who has an ear hear [that] which the Spirit says to the congregations!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 4
\f2\b0 \
Apa si cennen, ar y\'e9! fenna latyana menelde. Ar i minya \'f3ma ya hlassen qu\'e9ta \'f3ni n\'e1ne ve i lamma hy\'f3lo, ar eques: \'93Tula ama sir, ar lyen-tanuvan yar ron martuvar.\'94 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  M\'ed imya l\'fa t\'falen nu i t\'fare i Faireo, ar y\'e9! enge mahalma menelde, ar Qu\'e9n hande i mahalmasse.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 4\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
After this I saw, and behold! a door [that was] opened in heaven. And the first voice that I heard speak with me was like the sound of a trumpet, and it said: \'93Come up hither, and I shall show you [the things] that will soon happen.\'94 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  In the same moment I came under the power of the Spirit, and behold! there was a throne in heaven, and One sat on the throne.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 3
\f2\b0  Ilce yeo h\'e1ra tasse n\'e1 ve *namb\'edre ar *culm\'edre, ar *os i mahalma ea helyanwe, ve *laimaril ilcesse. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar *os i mahalma ear mahalmar canta *y\'faquean, ar i mahalmassen h\'e1rar amy\'e1rar canta *y\'faquean s\'e1mala ninqui larmar, ar r\'eder maltava cariltasse. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar et i mahalmallo t\'falar \'edtar ar \'f3mar ar hundier, ar ear calmar otso uryala epe i mahalma, yar nar i fairi otso Eruo. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ar epe i mahalma ea ya neme ve ailin calcava.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 3 
\f3\b0 The appearance of [him] who is sitting there is like jasper and carneol, and around the throne there is a rainbow, like an emerald in appearance. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  And around the throne there are four [and] twenty thrones, and on the thrones [there] are sitting four [and] twenty elders having white raiments, and thrones of gold on their head. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  And out of the throne are coming flashes and voices and thunders, and there are seven lamps burning before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  And before the throne there is [something] that seems like a lake of glass.
\f2\i0 \
\
	I endesse yasse i mahalma tare, *os i mahalma ear coiti canta, quante hendion epe ar cata: 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  i minya coite n\'e1 ve r\'e1, i attea ve mondo, i neldea same cendele ve atano, ar i cantea n\'e1 ve vilila \uc0\u351 oron. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ilya qu\'e9n i coition canta same r\'e1mar enque, ar ilya coite n\'e1 quanta hendion *os quanda hroarya ar mityave. S\'e9re ualte same, auresse yo l\'f3misse qu\'e9tala: \'93Aire, aire, aire n\'e1 i H\'e9ru Eru Iluvala, ye ea ar ye enge ar ye tuluva!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 	In the middle where the throne stands, around the throne [there] are four living creatures [
\f1\b coite
\f3\b0  = living being], full of eyes before and behind: 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  the first living creature is like a lion, the second like an ox, the third has a face like a man\'92s, and the fourth is like a flying eagle. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Every one of the four living creatures had six wings, and each living creature is full of eyes around his entire body and inside [
\f1\b mityave
\f3\b0 , adv.]. Rest they do not have, at day and and night saying: \'93Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, who is and who was and who shall come!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar m\'ed ilya l\'fa ya i coiti antar alcar ar laitale ar hantale yen h\'e1ra i mahalmasse, ye coita tennoio ar oi, 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  i amy\'e1rar canta *y\'faquean lantar undu epe ye h\'e1ra i mahalmasse ar *tyerir ye coita tennoio ar oi, ar hatilte r\'edeltar epe i mahalmanna, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  \'93Elye n\'e1 valda, Herulma ar Ainolma, cami\'e9no i alcar ar i laitie ar i t\'fare, an ontanel ilye nati, ar ind\'f3melyanen engelte ar n\'e1ner ontane.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 9
\f3\b0  And every time that the living creatures give glory and praise and thank to [him] who is sitting on the throne, who lives forever and ever, 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  the four [and] twenty elders fall down before [him] who is sitting on the throne and worship [him] who lives forever and ever, and they throw their crones before [lit. to before] the throne, saying: 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0 \'93You are worthy, our Lord and our God, of receiving the glory and the honor and the power, for you created all things, and by your will they existed and were created.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \
RANTA 5\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar cennen i formasse yeo hande i mahalmasse parma t\'e9cina mityave ar i ettesse, *lihtana *lihtainen otso. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar cennen polda vala ye y\'e1me taura \'f3manen: \'93Man n\'e1 valda panti\'e9no i parma ar raci\'e9no *lihtaryar?\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Mal *\'faquen menelde hya cemende hya nu cemen lertane panta i parma hya y\'e9ta minna sa. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar anen tur\'fana t\'fara yaimenen, an *\'faquen n\'e1ne hirna valda panti\'e9no i parma hya y\'e9ti\'e9no minna sa. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Mal qu\'e9n i amy\'e1raron quete ninna: \'93\'c1va na yaimea! Y\'e9! I R\'e1 ye n\'e1 Yeh\'faro nosseo, Laviro \uc0\u351 undo, ut\'faruye ar lerta panta i parma ar *lihtaryar otso.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 CHAPTER 5\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 And I saw in the right hand of [he] who sat on the throne a book written on the inside [
\f1\b mityave
\f3\b0 , adv.] and on the outside, sealed with seven seals. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And I saw a strong angel who cried out with a mighty voice: \'93Who is worthy of opening the book and of breaking its seals?\'94 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  But nobody in heaven or on earth or under earth might open the book or look into it. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  And I was overcome by a great wailing, for nobody was found worthy of opening the book or of looking into it. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  But one of the elders says to me: \'93Do not be wailing! Look! The Lion who is of the tribe of Judah, David\'92s root, has conquered and may open the book and its seven seals.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 6
\f2\b0  Ar cennen t\'e1rala endesse i mahalmo ar i coition canta, ar endesse i amy\'e1raron, eule ye s\'e1me i ilce n\'e1veo nanca, arwa rassion otso ar hendion otso, yar nar Eruo fairi otso, i mentanar mir i quanda cemen. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar lendes ar nampe i parma et formallo yeo hande i mahalmasse. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre nampes i parma, i coiti canta ar i amy\'e1rar canta *y\'faquean lantaner undu epe i Eule, ilya qu\'e9n s\'e1mala \'f1ande ar tolpor maltava yar n\'e1ner quante *nisqueo \'96 ya n\'e1 i hyamier i airion. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar lirilte vinya l\'edre, qu\'e9tala: \'93Nalye valda mapi\'e9no i parma ar panti\'e9no *lihtaryar, an anel nanca, ar sercelyanen ur\'faniel ennoli Erun et ilya nossello ar lambello ar n\'f3rello. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ac\'e1rielyet aranie ar *airimor Ainolvan, ar turuvalte cemende.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 6 
\f3\b0 And I saw standing in midst of the throne and the four living creatures, and in midst of the elders, a lamb that had the appearance of being slain [slaughtered], having seven horns and seven eyes, which are God\'92s seven spirits, the ones sent into the entire earth. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  And it went and took the book out of the right hand of [him] who sat on the throne. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  And when it took the book, the four living creatures and the four [and] twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, every one having a harp and bowls of gold that were full of incense \'96 which is the prayers of the holy ones. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And they sing a new song, saying: \'93You are worthy of taking the book and of opening its seals, for you were slain, and with your blood you have redeemed people for God out of every tribe and tongue and nation. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  You have made them a kingdom and priests for our God, and they shall rule on earth.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 11
\f2\b0  Ar cennen, ar hlassen \'f3ma rimbe valalion *os i mahalma ar i coiti ar i amy\'e1rar, ar n\'f3telta n\'e1ne ve *quaih\'fami *quaih\'famion ar h\'fami h\'famion, 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala taura \'f3manen: \'93I Eule ye n\'e1ne nahtana n\'e1 valda cami\'e9no i t\'fare ar alma ar sailie ar poldore ar laitie ar alcar ar aistie.\'94  \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 11
\f3\b0  And I saw, and I heard a voice of numerous angels around the throne and the living creatures and the elders, and their number was like myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands, 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  saying with a mighty voice: \'93The Lamb that was slain is worthy of receiving the power and wealth and wisdom and strength and honor [
\f1\b laitie
\f3\b0 , praising] and glory and blessing.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\i0\b \cf0 13
\f2\b0  Ar ilya onna ye ea mi menel cemenye ar nu cemen ar i earesse, ar ilye i nati tais, hlassen qu\'e9ta: \'93Yen h\'e1ra i mahalmasse ar i Eulen na i aistie ar i laitie ar i alcar ar i melehte tennoio ar oi.\'94 
\f0\b 14 
\f2\b0 Ar i coiti canta quenter: \'93N\'e1sie!\'94, ar i amy\'e1rar lantaner undu ar *tyerner.\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 \
	
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  And every creature that exists in heaven and earth and under earth and in the sea, and all the things in them, I heard say: \'93To [him] who is sitting on the throne and to the Lamb be the blessing and the honor and the might forever and ever.\'94 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  And the four living creatures said: \'93So be it!\'94, and the elders fell down and worshiped.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 6\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar cennen \'edre i Eule latyane mine i *lihtaron otso, ar hlassen qu\'e9n i coition canta qu\'e9ta \'f3manen ve hundier: \'93Tula!\'94 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar cennen, ar y\'e9! ninque rocco, ar ye hamme sesse s\'e1me quinga; ar r\'ede n\'e1ne sen antana, ar etelendes t\'farula ar turuyen.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 6\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice like thunders: \'93Come!\'94 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And I saw, and look! a white horse, and [he] who sat upon it had a bow; and a crown was given to him, and he went forth conquering and to conquer.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre latyanes i attea *lihta, hlassen i attea coite qu\'e9ta: \'93Tula!\'94 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar exe ett\'fale, narwa rocco; ar yen hamme sesse n\'e1ne antana mapa raine oa cemello, nahtieltan qu\'e9n i exe; ar haura macil n\'e1ne sen antana.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 3
\f3\b0  And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say: \'93Come!\'94 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  And another came out, a fiery-red horse; and to [him] who sat on it [it] was given to take peace away from earth, for them to slay one another; and a huge sword was given to him.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre latyanes i neldea *lihta, hlassen i neldea coite qu\'e9ta: \'93Tula!\'94 Ar cennen, ar y\'e9! more rocco; ar ye hamme sesse s\'e1me tolpot m\'e1ryatse. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen ya n\'e1ne ve \'f3ma endesse i coition canta qu\'e9ta: \'93Lesta oriva *aurepaityalen, ar lestar nelde *findoriva *aurepaityalen, ar \'e1va mala i millo ar i limpe.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature say: \'93Come!\'94 And I saw, and look! a black horse, and [he] who sat on it had a pair of scales [
\f1\b tolpot
\f3\b0 , dual of \'93bowl\'94] in his hands. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  And I heard [something] that was like a voice in the midst of the four living creatures say: \'93A measure of grain for a day\'92s wages, and three measures of barley for a day\'92s wages, and do not harm the oil and the wine.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre latyanes i cantea *lihta, hlassen i cantea coiteo \'f3ma qu\'e9ta: \'93Tula!\'94 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar cennen, ar y\'e9! malwa rocco, ar ye hamme sesse s\'e1me i esse \'d1uru, ar Mandos se-hilyane. Ar h\'e9re n\'e1ne t\'fan antana or i canasta cemeno, nahtien andamacilden ar saicel\'e9nen ar qualmequ\'e1menen ar i hravaninen cemeno.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 7
\f3\b0  And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say: \'93Come!\'94
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  And I saw, and behold! a pale horse, and [he] who sat on it had the name Death, and Mandos [Greek: Hades] followed him. And authority was given them [dual] over one fourth of earth, in order to slay with a long sword and with famine and with deadly disease [
\f1\b qualme-qu\'e1me
\f3\b0 , death-sickness] and with the beasts of earth.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre latyanes i lempea *lihta, cennen nu i *yangwa fear i nancaron castanen Eruo quetto ar i *vetti\'e9no ya s\'e1melte. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e1melte taura \'f3manen, qu\'e9tala: \'93Manen andave, aire ar \uc0\u351 anda H\'e9r, ual namuva ar ahtaruva sercelma issen marir cemende?\'94 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar ninque vaima n\'e1ne antana ilquenen mici te; ar n\'e1ne tien qu\'e9tina i mauyane tien n\'e1ve sende an \uc0\u351 inta l\'famesse, tenna i n\'f3te n\'e1ne qu\'e1tina y\'fa ion m\'e1lon\'faroltaron ar h\'e1noltaron, i nauvaner nahtane ve inte.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 9
\f3\b0  And when he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those slain by reason of God\'92s word and of the witness that they had. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And they cried with a mighty voice, saying: \'93How long, holy and true Sovereign, will you not pass judgment and avenge our blood [
\f1\b issen
\f3\b0  =] on those who dwell on earth?\'94 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  And a white robe was given to everyone among them; and [it] was said to them that it was necessary for them to be still for yet a little while, until the number was filled also of their fellow servants and of their brothers, who were going to be slain like themselves.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ar cennen \'edre latyanes i enquea *lihta, ar t\'fara *cempalie martane, ar Anar olle more ve *fillanne findiva, ar quanda I\uc0\u351 il olle ve serce, 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  ar menelo tinwi lantaner cemenna, ve \'edre i \'famanwe *rely\'e1vi lantar *rely\'e1valdallo p\'e1laina taura s\'farinen.\
\

\f1\i\b 12 
\f3\b0 And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and a great earthquake occurred, and the Sun changed [to become] black like a sack-cloth of hair, and the whole Moon became like blood, 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  and the stars of heaven fell to earth, as when the unripe figs fall from a fig-tree being shaken by a mighty wind.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 14
\f2\b0  Ar menel oante ve *toluparma n\'e1la toluina, ar ilya oron ar tol l\'e9ver yallo anelte. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar cemeno arani ar i taurar ar i c\'e1nor ar i l\'e1rear ar i poldar ar ilya m\'f3l ar ilya l\'e9ra qu\'e9n nurtaner inte i rottossen ar im\'edca i ondor i orontion. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Ar qu\'e9talte i orontinnar ar i ondonnar: \'93\'c1 lanta menna ar \'e1me nurta cendelello yeo h\'e1ra i mahalmasse ar i r\'fa\uc0\u351 ello i Euleo, 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  an i t\'fara aure r\'fa\uc0\u351 ettava ut\'falie, ar man pole tare?\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 14
\f3\b0  And heaven passed away like a scroll being rolled up, and every mountain and island moved from where they were. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And the kings of earth and the mighty and the commanders and the rich and the strong and every thrall and every free person hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  And they are saying to the mountains and to the rocks: \'93Fall upon us and hide us from [the one] who is sitting on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb, 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  for the great day of their wrath has come, and who can stand?\'94
\f2\i0 \
	\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 7\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Epeta cennen vali canta t\'e1rala i vincassen canta cemeno, avaleryala i s\'fari canta cemeno, pustien s\'fare hlapuyello cemende hya earesse hya ilya aldasse. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar cennen hyana vala ortala anar\'f3rello, arwa i *lihto Eru Coire\'e1va, ar y\'e1mes taura \'f3manen i valannar canta in n\'e1ne l\'e1vina mala cemen earye, 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1va mala cemen hya ear hya i aldar, n\'f3 *ilihtielme Ainolvo n\'faror timbareltassen.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 7\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Thereafter I saw four angels standing in the four corners of earth, holding back the four winds of earth, to stop wind from blowing on earth or at sea or at every [= any] tree. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And I saw another angel rising from the sunrise, having the seal of the Living God, and he cried with a mighty voice to the four angels to whom [it] was permitted to harm [
\f1\b cemen earye 
\f3\b0 =] earth and sea, 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  saying: \'93Do not harm earth or sea or the trees, before we have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen i n\'f3te i *lihtanaron, canta ar canaquean ar h\'fami tuxa, *lihtane et ilya nossello Israelindion:\
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Et nossello Yeh\'faro *lihtanar h\'fami yunque, et nossello Reuveno h\'fami yunque, et nossello \'c1ro h\'fami yunque,\
	
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  et nossello Ahyero h\'fami yunque, et nossello Naftalio h\'fami yunque, et nossello Manasseo h\'fami yunque,\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 4
\f3\b0  And I heard the number of the sealed ones, four and forty and a hundred thousands [= 144,000], sealed out of every tribe of the Children of Israel:
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 	
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Out of the tribe of Juda [Jehuda] twelve thousand sealed ones, out of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Gad twelve thousands,
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  out of the tribe of Asher twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousands;
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  et nossello Simeondo h\'fami yunque, et nossello Levio h\'fami yunque, et nossello Issac\'e1ro h\'fami yunque,\
	
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  et nossello Sevulundo h\'fami yunque, et nossello Y\'f3sefo h\'fami yunque, et nossello Venyam\'edno lihtanar h\'fami yunque.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 7 
\f3\b0  out of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Levi twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Issacar twelve thousands,
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  out of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousands, out of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand sealed ones.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Apa si cennen, ar y\'e9! haura rimbe ya *\'faquen ista onote, et ilye n\'f3rellon ar nossellon ar liellon ar lambellon, t\'e1rala epe i mahalma ar epe i Eule, vaine ninqui vaimassen; ar enger olvar *nindornion m\'e1ltassen. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e1melte taura \'f3manen, qu\'e9tala: \'93Rehtie tule Ainolvallo, ye h\'e1ra i mahalmasse, ar i Eulello.\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 9
\f3\b0  After this I saw, and behold! a huge crowd that nobody knows how to count, out of all nations [or, lands] and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clad in white robes; and there were branches of palms in their hands. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And they cried with a mighty voice, saying: \'93Salvation comes from our God, who is sitting on the throne, and from the Lamb.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar ilye i vali tarner *os i mahalma ar i amy\'e1rar ar i coiti canta, ar lantanelte cendeleltanna epe i mahalma ar *tyerner Eru, 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93N\'e1sie! I aistie ar i alcar ar i sailie ar i hantale ar i *laitie ar i t\'fare na Ainolvan, tennoio ar oi! N\'e1sie!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 11
\f3\b0  And all the angels stood around the throne and the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell upon their face before the throne and worshiped God, 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  saying: \'93Amen! The blessing and the glory and the wisdom and the thanksgiving and the honor and the power be to our God, forever and ever! Amen!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  T\'e1 qu\'e9n i amy\'e1raron carampe ninna, qu\'e9tala: \'93Man nar queni sine i nar vaine mi ninqui vaimar, ar mallo ut\'falielte?\'94 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Quenten senna: \'93Herunya, elye ista!\'94 Ar nyarnes nin: \'93Queni sine nar i t\'falar et i t\'fara \uc0\u351 angiello, ar opoitielte vaimaltar ar ininquit\'e1yer tai sercesse i Euleo. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Etta ealte epe i mahalma Eruva, ar *veuyaltes auresse yo l\'f3misse cordaryasse, ar ye h\'e1ra i mahalmasse panyuva *lancoarya or te. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Ualte nauva maite hya soice ata; Anar ua petuva te, hya urtala \'fare. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  An i Eule endesse i mahalmo nauva mavarelta, ar te-tulyuvas ehtelennar coirea nenwa, ar Eru mapuva oa ilya nie hendultalto.\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 13
\f3\b0  Then one of the elders spoke to me, saying: \'93Who are these people that are clad in white robes, and  where have they come from?\'94 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  I said to him: \'93My lord, you know!\'94 And he told me: \'93These people are [the ones] who come out of the great tribulation, and they have cleansed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  Therefore they are before the throne of God, and they serve him day and night in his temple, and [he] who is sitting on the throne shall place his tent over them. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  They shall not be hungry or thirsty again; the sun shall not strike them, or [any] burning heat. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  For the Lamb in midst of the throne shall be their shepherd, and he shall lead them to springs of living water, and God shall take away every tear from their eyes.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 8\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 \'cdre i Eule latyane i otsea *lihta enge quilde menelde *os perta l\'fameo. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  T\'e1 cennen i vali otso i tarir epe Eru, ar hy\'f3lar otso n\'e1ner tien antane. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar hyana vala, ye s\'e1me *nisquema maltava, t\'fale ar tarne ara i *yangwa, ar n\'e1ne sen antana hoa lesta *nisqueo, carien ostime as i hyamier ilye i airion, i *yangwasse maltava epe i mahalma. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar ho i valo m\'e1, epe Eru, i usque i *nisqueo oronte as i hyamier i airion. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i vala nampe i *nisquema ar sa-quante n\'e1renen i *yangwallo. Ar sa-hantes cemenna; ar enger hundi\'e9li ar \'f3mali ar \'edtali ar palie cemeno.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 8\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
When the Lamb opened the seventh seal there was silence in heaven around half of an hour. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  Then I saw the seven angels that stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And another angel, who had an incense vessel of gold, came and stood beside the altar, and a great measure of incense was given to him, to make a blend with the prayers of all the holy ones, on the altar of gold before the throne. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  And from the angel\'92s hand, before God, the smoke from the incense rose with the prayers of the holy ones. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Then the angel took the incense vessel and filled it with fire from the altar. And he threw it upon earth; and there were thunders and voices and flashes and a shaking of the earth.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  S\'ed i vali otso i s\'e1mer i hy\'f3lar otso manwaner lamy\'e1ven tai.\
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  I minya vala lamyane hy\'f3larya, ar hilyaner *helexe ar ruive ostimesse as serce, ar anes h\'e1tina cemenna; ar nelesta cemeno n\'e1ne urtana, ar nelesta i aldaron n\'e1ner urtane, ar ilya laica salque n\'e1ne urtana.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 6
\f3\b0  Now the seven angels that had the seven trumpets prepared to sound them.
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  The first angel sounded his trumpet, and there followed hail and fire in a blend with blood, and it was hurled to earth; and a third of earth was burnt, and a third of the trees were burned, and all green grass was burnt.
\f2\i0 \
	\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 8
\f2\b0  I attea vala lamyane hy\'f3larya, ar nat ve hoa oron, uryala narnen, n\'e1ne h\'e1tina mir ear; 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  ar nelesta earo olle serce, nelesta i onnaron earesse qualler, i s\'e1mer coivie; ar nelesta i ciryaron n\'e1ner nancarne.\

\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  I neldea vala lamyane hy\'f3larya, ar hoa tinwe lantane menello, uryala ve calma, ar lantanes i nelestanna i s\'edrion ar ehteleron nenwa. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  I tinweo esse *S\'e1r\'e1laique n\'e1. Nelesta i nenion olle *s\'e1ralaique, ar rimbe ennoli qualler i nennen, an anes carna s\'e1ra.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 8
\f3\b0  The second angel sounded his trumpet, and a thing like a great mountain, burning with fire, was thrown into [the] sea; 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  and a third of [the] sea became blood, a third part of the creatures in [the] sea died, the [ones] that had life; and a third of the ships were destroyed [
\f1\b nancarne
\f3\b0  = \'93undone\'94].
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 10
\f3\b0  The third angel sounded his trumpet, and a huge star fell from heaven, burning like a lamp, and it fell on the third part of the rivers and springs of water. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  The star\'92s name is Wormwood. A third part of the waters became wormwood, and many people died of the water, for it was made bitter.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 12
\f2\b0  I cantea vala lamyane hy\'f3larya, ar nelesta Anaro n\'e1ne p\'e9tina, ar nelesta I\uc0\u351 ilo, ar nelesta i tinwion. Sie nelesta calalto olle mornie; l\'e1 enge cala nelestasse i aureo, hya nelestasse i l\'f3mio.\

\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Ar cennen, ar hlassen \uc0\u351 oron y\'e1ma taura \'f3manen lan v\'edlanes endesse menelo: \'93Ai, ai, ai in marir cemende, i lemyala hy\'f3lalammainen ho i vali nelde i s\'ed lamyuvar hy\'f3lalta!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 \

\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  The fourth angel sounded his trumpet, and a third part of [the] Sun was smitten [
\f1\b p\'e9tina
\f3\b0  = struck], and a third of [the] Moon, and a third of the stars. Thus a third of their light became darkness; [there] was no light for a third of the day, or for a third of the night.
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 13
\f3\b0  And I saw, and I heard an eagle cry with a mighty voice while it was flying in the midst of heaven: \'93Woe, woe, woe for those who dwell on earth, because of [-
\f1\b nen
\f3\b0 ] the remaining trumpet-sounds from the three angels that will now sound their trumpet!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 9\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar i lempea vala lamyane hy\'f3larya, ar cennen tinwe lantienwa menello cemenna, ar n\'e1ne sen antana i *latil i sapto i undumeo. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Latyanes i sapta i undumeo, ar usque oronte ve hoa urnallo, ar Anar ar i vilya oller morne i usquenen i saptallo. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar et i usquello t\'faler *salquec\'e1poli cemenna, ar n\'e1ne ten antana h\'e9re ve i h\'e9re i *nastaroron cemende.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 9\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
And the fifth angel sounded his trumpet, and I saw a star fallen from heaven to earth, and the key to the pit of the abyss was given to him. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  He opened the pit of the abyss, and smoke rose as from a huge oven, and [the] sun and the air became dark by the smoke from the pit. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And out of the smoke came grasshoppers upon earth, and authority [
\f1\b h\'e9re
\f3\b0 , lordship] like the authority of the scorpions on earth was given to them.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 4
\f2\b0  N\'e1ne tien qu\'e9tina i \'e1valte malumne cemeno salque hya ilya laica olva hya erya alda, mal rie i queni l\'e1 arwe i *lihto Eruva timbareltasse. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  N\'e1ne tien antana te-\'f1walie astassen lempe, mal l\'e1 te-nahtie, ar \'f1walmelta n\'e1ne ve \'f1walme *nastaro, \'edre nastas qu\'e9n. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar m\'ed ente r\'ed queni cestuvar \'f1uru, mal laume hiruvalte sa; milyuvalte quale, mal \'f1uru u\uc0\u351 uva tello.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 4
\f3\b0  [It] was said to them that they were not to harm the grass of earth or every [= any] green plant or a single tree, but only the people not having the seal of God on their forehead. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  [It] was given to them to torment them for five months, but not to kill them, and their torment was like the torment of a scorpion, when it stings somebody. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  And in those days people shall seek death, but they shall by no means find it; they shall long to die, but death shall escape from them.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ilce i *salquec\'e1poron n\'e1ne ve roccor manwane ohtan; ar cariltasse enger yar nemne ve r\'eder maltava; cendelelta n\'e1ne ve atanion cendele, 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  ar s\'e1melte findele ve nission findele, ar nelciltar n\'e1ner ve r\'e1vion nelci; 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  s\'e1melte ambassi ve angaine ambassi, ar i lamma r\'e1maltaron n\'e1ne ve i lamma rimbe norolleron arwe roccoron i n\'f3rar ohtanna. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Samilte pimpe arwe nasseo ve *nastaror samir, ar ea pimpeltasse t\'farelta malien queni astassen lempe. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ve aran te-turila ea tien i undumeo vala; esserya Heveryasse Avandon n\'e1, ar Hellenyasse samis i esse Apollion.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 	
\f1\b 7 
\f3\b0 The appearance of the grasshoppers was like horses prepared for war; and on their head were [things] that looked like crowns of gold; their face was like men\'92s face, 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  and they had hair like women\'92s hair, and their teeth were like lions\'92 teeth; 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  they had breast-plates like breast-plates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the sound of many chariots with horses that are running to war. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  They had a tail with a sting like scorpions have, and their power to harm people for five months is in their tails. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  As a king ruling them [there] is to them the angel of the abyss; his name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek he has the name Apollyon.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 12
\f2\b0  I minya naice av\'e1nie. Y\'e9! tuluvat an naice atta apa si.\

\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  I enquea vala lamyane hy\'f3larya, ar hlassen \'f3ma i rassellon canta i *yangwasse maltava epe Eru 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  qu\'e9ta i enquea valanna, isse ye s\'e1me i hy\'f3la: \'93\'c1 lerya i vali canta i nar n\'fatine ara i hoa s\'edre Perat!\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar i vali canta n\'e1ner leryane, i n\'e1ner manwane i l\'famen, i auren, i astan ar i loan, nahtien nelesta Atanion.\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \
	
\f1\i 12
\f3\b0  The first woe has passed. Behold! [there] will come two woes more after this.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 	
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  The sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and I heard a voice from the four horns on the altar of gold before God 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  say to the sixth angel, he who had the trumpet: \'93Release the four angels that are bound by the great river Euphrates!\'94 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And the four angels were released, who were prepared for the hour, for the day, for the month and for the year, to kill one third of Men.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 16
\f2\b0  I n\'f3te i roquenion hosseltasse n\'e1ne h\'fami *y\'faquean l\'far h\'fami quean; hlassen n\'f3telta. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Ar sie yentenye i roccor ar i hammer tesse m\'ed maur: i roqueni coller ambassi arwe i quileo n\'e1reo ar l\'faleo ar *ussardo, ar i cas i roccoiva n\'e1ne ve cas r\'e1vion, ar ruine ar usque ar *ussar lender et antoltallo. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Nelde sine ungwal\'ednen nelesta Atanion n\'e1ne nahtana, i n\'e1renen ar i usquenen ar i *ussardenen yar lender et antoltallo. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  An i t\'fare i roccoron ea antoltasse ar pimpeltasse; pimpelta n\'e1ne ve leuca, arwe caro, ar sanen harnalte.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 16
\f3\b0  The number of the riders in their army was twenty thousands [
\f1\b l\'far
\f3\b0  =] times ten thousand; I heard their number. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  And so I beheld the horses and those who sat on them in the vision: the riders bore breastplates with the colour of fire and of sapphire and of sulphur, and the head of the horses was like the head of lions, and fire and smoke and sulphur went out of their mouth. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  By these three plagues one third of Men was [/were] slain, by the fire and by the smoke and by the sulphur that went out of their mouth. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  For the power of the horses is in their mouth and in their tail; their tail was like a serpent, having a head, and by means of it they wound [people].
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 20
\f2\b0  I lemyala ranta Atanion, i \'faner nahtane sine ungwal\'ednen, uar hirne inwis pa i cardar m\'e1ltato hya pustane *tyere raucor ar cordoni maltava ar telpeva ar urusteva ar ondova ar toava, yar uar pole cene hya hlare hya vanta; 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  ente, ualte hirne inwis pa nahtieltar hya \'f1\'f3lelta hya *hrupuhtalelta hya pilweltar.\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 	\
	
\f1\i\b 20
\f3\b0  The remaining part of Men, who were not killed by these plagues, did not find repentance concerning the deeds of their hands [dual] or cease to worship demons and idols of gold and of silver and of copper and of stone and of wood, that cannot see or hear or walk; 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  furthermore; they did not find repentance concerning their murders or their sorcery or their fornication or their thefts.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 10\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar cennen hyana polda vala t\'fala undu menello, vaina fanyasse ar arwa helyanweo or carya, ar cendelerya n\'e1ne ve Anar, ar telcoryat ve tarmar n\'e1reva. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  S\'e1mes pitya pantana parma. Ar panyanes forya talya earesse ar i hyarya noresse, 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  ar y\'e1mes taura \'f3manen, ve \'edre r\'e1 n\'e1 r\'e1vea. Ar \'edre y\'e1mes, i hundier otso quenter v\'e9re \'f3maltainen.\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 4
\f2\b0  Apa i hundier otso quenter, inye tecumne, mal hlassen \'f3ma menello ya quente: \'93\'c1 *lihta yar i hundier otso equ\'e9tier ar \'e1va tece tail!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 10\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
And I saw another strong angel come down from heaven, clad in a cloud and having a rainbow over his head, and his face is like [the] Sun, and his feet [or, legs] like pillars of fire. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  He had a small, opened book. And he placed his right foot on [the] sea and the left on [the] land, 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  and he cried [out] with a mighty voice, as when a lion is roaring. And when he cried [out], the seven thunders spoke with their own voices.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 4
\f3\b0  After the seven thunders spoke, I was going to write, but I heard a voice from heaven that said: \'93Seal up [the things] which the seven thunders have said and do not write them!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 5
\f2\b0  Ar i vala ya cennen t\'e1rala earesse ar noresse ortane m\'e1rya menelenna ar antane vandarya yenen coita tennoio ar oi, ye ontane menel ar ya ea sasse, ar cemen ar ya ea sasse, ar ear ar ya ea sasse: \'93I l\'fame av\'e1nie! 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Mal m\'ed r\'ed yassen i otsea vala nauva hl\'e1raina \'96 \'edre lamyuvas hy\'f3larya \'96 t\'e1 Eruo f\'f3le nauva telyaina, ve i evandilyon ya antanes n\'faroryain, i Eruterc\'e1nor.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 5
\f3\b0  And the angel that I saw standing on sea and land raised his hand to heaven and gave his oath by [the one] who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and [that] which is in it, and earth and [that] which is in it, and [the] sea and [that] which is in it: \'93The time has passed! [or: Time is out!] 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  But in the days [
\f1\b r\'ed
\f3\b0  pl. of 
\f1\b r\'e9
\f3\b0 ] in which the seventh angel shall be heard \'96 when he shall sound his trumpet \'96 then God\'92s mystery shall be completed, according to the gospel that he gave to his servants, the prophets.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 8
\f2\b0  Ar i \'f3ma ya hlassen menello quente ninna ata, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1 lelya, \'e1 mapa i parma ya n\'e1 pantana ho i m\'e1 i valo ye t\'e1ra earesse ar noresse.\'94 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar lenden i valanna ar quente senna i nin-antauvanes i pitya parma; ar quentes ninna: \'93\'c1sa mapa ar mata; nauvas s\'e1ra cumbalyan, mal lisse ve melu sangolyasse.\'94 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar nampen i pitya parma ho i valo m\'e1 ar sa-mante; anes lisse ve melu sangonyasse, mal apa mantenyes cumbanya olle s\'e1ra. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina ninna: \'93Mauya lyen ata quete ve Eruterc\'e1no, pa lieli ar n\'f3reli ar lambeli, ar rimbe aralli.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 8
\f3\b0  And the voice that I heard from heaven spoke to me again, saying: \'93Go, and take the book that is opened from the hand of the angel who is standing on sea and land.\'94 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And I went to the angel and said to him that he was to give me the little book; and he said to me: \'93Take it and eat [it]; it shall be bitter to your belly, but sweet as honey in your mouth.\'94 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And I took the little book from the angel\'92s hand and ate it; it was sweet as honey in my mouth, but after I ate it my belly became bitter. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  And [it] was said to me: \'93You must again speak like a prophet, about peoples and nations and tongues, and many kings.\'94[
\f1\b Mauya lyen
\f3\b0  = \'93(it) compels for you\'94 = you must. 
\f1\b Aralli
\f3\b0 , partitive plural of 
\f1\b aran
\f3\b0  \'93king\'94.]
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 11\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar sirpe ve vandil n\'e1ne nin antana, ar mo quente: \'93\'c1 orta ar \'e1 *lesta i corda Eruva ar i *yangwa ar i *tyerir sasse, 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  mal \'e1 hehta i cordo etya paca ar \'e1vasa *lesta, an nas antana n\'f3rin, ar *vattuvalte i aire ostonna astassen atta ar *canaquean. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar lavuvan *vettonya attan quete ve Eruterc\'e1nor ter r\'ed enenquean ar tuxar yunque, vaine mi lanne findiva.\'94 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  T\'fa n\'e1t i *milpialda atta ar i calmatarma atta yar tarir epe i Heru cemeno.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 11\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
And a rod like a staff was given to me, and one said: \'93Rise and measure the temple of God and the altar and those who worship in it, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  but leave out the temple\'92s outer courtyard and do not measure it, for it is given to [the] nations [i.e. the Gentiles], and they shall trample upon the holy city for two and forty months. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And I shall let my two witnesses speak as prophets for [
\f1\b ter
\f3\b0  = through] sixty and twelve hundred days, clad in cloth of hair. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  They [
\f1\b t\'fa
\f3\b0 , dual] are [
\f1\b n\'e1t
\f3\b0 , dual] the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand before the Lord of earth.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 5
\f2\b0  Qui aiquen mere mala t\'fa, n\'e1r mene et antottallo ar ammate \'f1ottottar, ar qui aiquen mere mala t\'fa, nauvas nahtana sie. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  T\'fa samit h\'e9re holtien menel, pustien ulo lantiello m\'ed r\'ed yar qu\'e9tatte ve Eruterc\'e1nor, ar samitte h\'e9re or i neni, vist\'e1ven tai mir serce ar petien cemen ilya ungwal\'e9nen, quiquie meritte.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 5
\f3\b0  If anyone wants to harm them, fire goes out of their mouth and devours their enemies, and if anyone wants to harm them, he shall be slain thus. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  They [
\f1\b t\'fa
\f3\b0 , dual] have the authority to shut up heaven, to stop rain from falling in the days that they are speaking as prophets, and they have authority over the waters, in order to turn [lit. change] them into blood and to strike earth with every plague, whenever they wish. [Notice the endings -
\f1\b tte
\f3\b0  and *-
\f1\b tta
\f3\b0  for dual \'93they\'94 and their\'94.]
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 7
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre etelyaniette *vettietta, i hravan ye orya i undumello ohtacaruva t\'fana, ar tur\'favas tu ar nahtuva tu. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar loicottat caituvat i palla mallesse i hoa ostosse ya mi l\'e9 i faireo n\'e1 estaina Sorom ar Mirrandor, yasse y\'fa Herutta tarwestana n\'e9. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ennoli i lieron ar nossion ar lambion ar n\'f3rion y\'e9tuvar loicottat ter r\'ed nelde ar perta, ar ualte lave i loicottat n\'e1t panyane sapsasse. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar i marir cemende samir alasse pa t\'fa ar nar valime, ar mentauvalte annar qu\'e9n i exenna, an Eruterc\'e1no atta sine \'f1walyanet i marir cemende.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 7
\f3\b0  And when they have completed their witnessing, the beast that rises from the abyss will make war upon them [
\f1\b t\'fana
\f3\b0 , dual], and it will conquer them and slay them. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  And their corpses [
\f1\b loicottat
\f3\b0 , dual] shall lie in the broad street in the huge city that in the manner of spirit is called Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Persons of the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations shall look upon their corpses for three and a half days, and they do not permit that their corpses are put in a grave. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And those who dwell on earth have joy concerning them and are happy, and they shall send gifts to one another, for these two prophets tormented those who dwell on earth.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 11
\f2\b0  Mal apa i r\'ed nelde ar perta coiviefaire Erullo t\'fale minna tu, ar orontette taluttatse, ar t\'fara caure lantane innar yenter tu. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ar hlassette taura \'f3ma et menello qu\'e9ta t\'fana: \'93Tula ama sir!\'94 Ar lendette mir menel i fanyasse, ar cotumottar cenner tu. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Ar l\'fame yanasse enge t\'fara *cempalie, ar quaista i osto atalante, ar queni h\'fami otso n\'e1ner nahtane i *cempali\'e9nen, ar i lemner n\'e1ner ruhtane ar antaner alcar Erun menelo.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 But after the three and a half days life-spirit from God came into them, and they rose on their feet, and great fear fell upon those who looked at them. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  And they heard a mighty voice out of heaven say to them: \'93Come up here!\'94 And they went into heaven in the cloud, and their enemies saw them. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  And at that time [there] was a great earthquake, and one tenth of the city collapsed, and seven thousand people were killed by the earthquake, and [those] who remained were terrified and gave glory to [the] God of heaven.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 14
\f2\b0  I attea naice av\'e1nie. Y\'e9! i neldea naice tuluva ron.\

\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar i otsea vala lamyane hy\'f3larya. Ar taure \'f3mali n\'e1ner hl\'e1raine menelde, qu\'e9tala: \'93I aranie i mardo ol\'f3lie Herulvo ar Hristoryo, ar turuvas tennoio ar oi.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 14
\f3\b0  The second woe has passed. Behold! the third woe shall come soon.
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 15
\f3\b0  And the seventh angel sounded his trumpet. And mighty voices were being heard in heaven, saying: \'93The kingdom of the world has become our Lord\'92s and his Christ\'92s, and he will rule forever and ever.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 16
\f2\b0  Ar i amy\'e1rar canta ar *y\'faquean i hammer epe Eru mahalmaltassen lantaner cendeleltannar ar *tyerner Eru, 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93Hantalme lyen, H\'e9ru Eru, i Iluvala, ye ea ar ye enge, an am\'e1piel t\'fara t\'farelya ar ture ve aran. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Mal n\'f3ri n\'e1ner r\'fa\uc0\u351 ie, ar v\'e9ra r\'fa\u351 elya t\'fale, ar i l\'fame namien i qualinar ar ant\'e1ven *paityale n\'farolyain i Eruterc\'e1nor, ar i airin ar in rucir esselyallo, i pityain yo i t\'farain, ar nancarien i nancarir cemen.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 16
\f3\b0  And the four and twenty elders that sat before God on their thrones fell on their faces and worshipped God, 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  saying: \'93We thank you, Lord God, the Almighty, who is and who was, for you have taken your great power and rule as king. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  But [the] nations were wrathful, and your own wrath came, and the time for judging the dead and for giving reward to your servants the prophets, and to the holy ones and to those who fear your name, to the small and the great, and for destroying [those] who destroy earth. [
\f1\b Nancar
\f3\b0 - \'93undo\'94, here used = \'93destroy\'94.]
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 19
\f2\b0  Ar i corda Eruva ya ea menelde n\'e1ne latyana, ar i colca v\'e9reryo n\'e1ne c\'e9naina cordaryasse. Ar enger \'edtali ar \'f3mali ar hundi\'e9li ar *cempalie ar t\'fara *helexe.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 19
\f3\b0  And God\'92s temple that is in heaven was opened, and the ark [
\f1\b colca
\f3\b0  \'93box\'94] of his covenant was being seen in his temple. And [there] were flashes and voices and thunders and an earthquake and great hail.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 12\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar t\'fara tanwa n\'e1ne c\'e9naina menelde, n\'eds vaina Anaresse, ar I\uc0\u351 il enge nu talyat, ar caryasse enge r\'ede tinwiva yunque. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Anes lunga h\'ednanen, ar yamas naiceryassen ar \'f1walmeryasse colien.\
	
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar hyana tanwa n\'e1ne c\'e9nina menelde, ar y\'e9! hoa narwa hl\'f3ce, arwa carion otso ar rassion quean, ar caryassen samis *\uc0\u351 arnuntar otso. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Pimperya tuce nelesta i tinwion menelo, ar hantes tai undu cemenna. Ar i hl\'f3ce tarne epe i n\'eds ye n\'e1ne manwa colien, ammatieryan h\'ednarya \'edre h\'e9 columne.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 12\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
And a great sign was being seen in heaven, a woman clad in [the] Sun, and [the] Moon was under her feet, and on her head was a crown of twelve stars. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  She was heavy with child, and she cries [out] in her pains and in her agony to bear [/give birth].
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And another sign was seen in heaven, and behold! a huge fiery-red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on its heads it has seven diadems. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  Its tail drags one third of the stars of heaven, and it throws them down upon earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was ready to bear [a child], for it to devour her child when she would bear [it].
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar colles yondo, seldo, ye turuva ilye n\'f3ri angaina vandilden. Ar h\'ednarya n\'e1ne mapana oa Erunna ar mahalmaryanna. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ar i n\'eds \'fa\uc0\u351 e mir i ravanda, yasse samis n\'f3me manwana lo Eru, ant\'e1veltan sen tasse maureryar ter r\'ed *enenquean ar tuxar yunque.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 5
\f3\b0  And she bore a son, a boy, who shall rule all nations with an iron rod. And her child was seized away to God and to his throne. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  And the woman escaped into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God, for them to give her her needs there for sixty and twelve hundred [= 1260] days.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar ohta martane menelde: M\'edcael ar valaryar mahtaner i hl\'f3cenna, ar i hl\'f3ce ar valaryar mahtaner, 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  mal uas turune, ar tien n\'f3me \'fane ambe h\'edraina menelde. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar i t\'fara hl\'f3ce n\'e1ne h\'e1tina undu, i enwina leuca, ye n\'e1 estaina i Arauco ar S\'e1tan, ye tyare quanda Ambar ranya \'96 anes h\'e1tina undu cemenna, ar valaryar n\'e1ner h\'e1tine undu \'f3se.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 7
\f3\b0  And a war occurred in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and its angels fought, 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  but he did not conquer, and for them no place was found in heaven anymore [lit: and for them place was not more being found in heaven]. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And the great dragon was thrown down, the ancient serpent, who is called the Devil and Satan, who causes [the] entire world to err \'96 he was thrown down upon earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 10
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen taura \'f3ma menello qu\'e9ta: \'93S\'ed ut\'falier i rehtie ar i t\'fare ar i aranie Ainolvo ar i h\'e9re Hristoryo, an i *ulqu\'e9to h\'e1nolvaron h\'e1tina undu n\'e1, ye te
\f0\b  
\f2\b0 quente ulco ana te mi aure yo l\'f3me epe Ainolva! 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar turuneltes i Euleo sercenen ar *vettielto quettanen, ar coivieltar \'faner tien ta melde i avanelte vele qualme. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Etta na valime, a menel ar i marir sasse! Ai cemenen ar earen! An i Arauco ut\'falie undu lenta, arwa t\'fara r\'fa\uc0\u351 eo, istala i l\'famerya \u351 inta n\'e1.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 10
\f3\b0  And I heard a mighty voice from heaven say: \'93Now the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God and the lordship of his Christ have come, for the accuser of our brothers is thrown down, who spoke evil against them day and night before our God! 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  And they conquered him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their witness, and their lives were not to them so dear that they refused to see [or, meet] death. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  Therefore be happy, o heaven and [those] who dwell in it! Alas for earth and sea! For the Devil has come down to you [
\f1\b lenta
\f3\b0 , dual allative], having great wrath, knowing that his time is short.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre i hl\'f3ce cenne i anes h\'e1tina undu cemenna, roitanes i n\'eds ye colde i seldo. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Mal r\'e1mat i t\'fara \uc0\u351 orno n\'e1net antane i nissen, polieryan vile mir i ravanda n\'f3meryanna; tasse camis maureryar ter l\'fame ar l\'fameli ar perta l\'fameo, haira i leuco cendelello.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 13
\f3\b0  And when the dragon saw that it was thrown down upon earth, it pursued the woman who bore the boy. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  But the two wings [
\f1\b r\'e1mat
\f3\b0 , dual] of the great eagle were [
\f1\b n\'e1net
\f3\b0 , dual] given to the woman, for her to be able to fly into the wilderness to her place; there she receives her needs for a time and times and half of a time, far from the face of the serpent.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar i leuca mentane n\'e9n ve s\'edre antoryallo apa i n\'eds, se-colien oa i s\'edrenen. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Mal cemen manyane i n\'eds, ar cemen latyane antorya ar *hlunce i s\'edre ya quamne i hl\'f3ce antoryallo. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Ar i hl\'f3ce n\'e1ne r\'fa\uc0\u351 ea i nissenna, ar lende oa ohtacarien innar lemner erderyo, i hepir i axani Eruo ar samir i *vettie pa Y\'e9sus.    \
\
	
\f1\i\b 15
\f3\b0  And the serpent sent water like a river from its mouth after the woman, to carry her away by [means of] the river. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  But earth helped the woman, and earth opened its mouth and swallowed the river that the dragon vomited from its mouth. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  And the dragon was wroth with [-
\f1\b nna
\f3\b0 , \'93 against\'94] the woman, and went away to make war on [those] who remained of her seed, [the ones] who keep the commandments of God and have the witness about Jesus.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 13\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar tarnes i litsesse ara ear.\
	Ar cennen hravan ortala et earello, arwa rassion quean ar carion otso, ar rasseryassen samis *\uc0\u351 arnuntar quean, ar cariryassen ear esseli yaiweo Eruva. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar i hravan ye cennen n\'e1ne ve *picara, mal taliryar n\'e1ner ve morco tali, ar antorya n\'e1ne ve r\'e1vo anto. Ar i hl\'f3ce antane sen t\'farerya ar mahalmarya ar t\'fara h\'e9re.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 CHAPTER 13\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 And it stood on the sand by [the] sea.\
	And I saw a beast rising out of [the] sea, having ten horns and seven heads, and on its horns it has ten diadems, and on its heads [there] are names of mockery of God. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And the beast that I saw was like a leopard, but its feet were like a bear\'92s feet, and its mouth was like a lion\'92s mouth. And the dragon gave it its power and its throne and great authority [
\f1\b h\'e9re
\f3\b0 , lordship].
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 3
\f2\b0  I nemesta ero caryaron n\'e1ne ve qui anes harna qualmen, mal qualmeharwerya n\'e1ne nestaina, ar i quanda cemen hilyane i hravan elmendasse. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar *tyernelte i hl\'f3ce pan antanes i h\'e9re i hravanen, ar *tyernelte i hravan qu\'e9tala: \'93Man ve i hravan n\'e1, ar man pole mahta senna?\'94 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar n\'e1ne sen antana anto qu\'e9tala t\'fare nati ar yaiwi Erunna, ar camnes h\'e9re carien ya meris astain atta ar *canaquean. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ar latyanes antorya yaiwessen Erunna, quetien yaiwi esseryanna ar vehteryanna, ar innar marir menelde. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar n\'e1ne sen antana care ohta i airinnar ar turue te, ar camnes h\'e9re or ilya nosse ar lie ar lambe ar n\'f3re. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar ilye i marir cemende se-*tyeruvar, t\'e9 ion essi uar t\'e9cine Parmasse Coivi\'e9va i Euleva ye n\'e1ne nanca i tulciello i mardeva.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 3
\f3\b0  The appearance of one of its heads was as if it was wounded to death, but its death-wound was healed, and the entire earth followed the beast in wonder. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  And they worshiped the dragon since it gave the authority to the beast, and they worshiped the beast saying: \'93Who is like the beast, and who can fight against it?\'94 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  And [there] was given to it a mouth speaking great things and mockeries against God, and it received authority to do what it wants for two and forty months. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  And it opened its mouth in mockeries against God, to speak mockeries against his name and against his abode, and of [those] who dwell in heaven. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  And [there] was given to it to make war on the holy ones and to conquer them, and it received authority over every tribe and people and tongue and nation. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  And all [those] who dwell on earth will worship it, they whose names are not written in the Book of Live of the Lamb who was killed from the founding of the world.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 9
\f2\b0  Aiquen arwa hlaro, nai hlaruvas! 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Qui qu\'e9n mandon n\'e1, mir mando menis. Qui qu\'e9n nahtuva macilden, nauvas nanca macilden. S\'eds ea maure voronweva ar savi\'e9va i airion.\

\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar cennen hyana hravan, ye oronte et cemello, ar s\'e1mes rasset ve eule, mal carampes ve hl\'f3ce. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Mahtas i quanda h\'e9re i minya hravano epe henduryat. Tyaris cemen ar i marir sasse *tyere i minya hravan, yeo qualmeharwe n\'e1ne nestana. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Ar caris t\'fare tanwar; yando n\'e1r tyaris lanta undu et menello cemenna epe hendu atanion.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 9
\f3\b0  Anyone having an ear, may he hear! 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  If a person is for prison, into prison he goes. If a person will kill by sword, he will be killed by sword [
\f1\b macil-nen
\f3\b0  > 
\f1\b macilden
\f3\b0 ]. Here [there] is need of faithfulness and of [the] faith of the holy ones.
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 11
\f3\b0  And I saw another beast, that rose out of earth, and it had two horns [
\f1\b rasset
\f3\b0 , dual] like a lamb, but it spoke as a dragon. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  It wields [or, uses] the entire authority of the first beast before its eyes. It causes earth and [those] who dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose death-wound was healed. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  And it does great signs; also [/even] fire it causes to fall down out of heaven to earth before [the] eyes of men.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 14
\f2\b0  Ar tyaris vare i marir cemende, i tanwainen yar nar sen l\'e1vina care epe hendu i hravano. Quetis innar marir cemende i caruvalte emma i hravano, ye camne i nahte macilo ar nanwenne coivienna. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ente, n\'e1ne sen l\'e1vina anta \uc0\u351 \'fale i hravano emman, ty\'e1rala i hravano emma carpa, ar y\'fa ty\'e1rala n\'e1ve nahtane illi i v\'e1quenter *tyere i hravano emma.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 14
\f3\b0  And it causes to err [those] who dwell on earth, by the signs that it is allowed to do before the eyes of the beast. It says to [those] who dwell on earth that they are to make [an] image of the beast, who received the wound of a sword and came back to life. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  Furthermore, [it] was granted to it to give breath to the beast\'92s image, causing the beast's image to talk, and also causing to be slain all who refused to worship the beast's image.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 16
\f2\b0  Ar tyaris illi, i pityar ar i t\'farar, i l\'e1rear ar i penyar, ar i l\'e9rar ar i m\'f3li, came tehta formaltasse hya timbareltasse, 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  ar *\'faquen n\'e1ne l\'e1vina manca hya vace hequa qu\'e9n arwa i tehto \'96 i hravano esse hya i n\'f3te esseryo. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  S\'eds ea maure saili\'e9va: Lava i handan note i hravano n\'f3te, an n\'e1s atano n\'f3te, ar n\'f3terya n\'e1 enque ar *enenquean ar tuxar enque.\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 \
	
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  And it causes all, the small and the great, the rich and the poor, and the free and the thralls, to receive a mark on their right hand or on their forehead, 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  and nobody was allowed to trade or sell except a person having the mark \'96 the beast\'92s name or the number of its name. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  Here [there] is need of wisdom: Let the intelligent one calculate the beast\'92s number, for it is a man\'92s number, and its name is six and sixty and six hundreds [= 666].
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 14
\f2\b0 \
Ar cennen, ar y\'e9! i Eule t\'e1rane to Oron S\'edon, ar as s\'e9 h\'fami canta *canaquean ar tuxa i samir esserya ar i esse Ataryo t\'e9cine timbareltasse. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen lamma et menello, ve i lamma rimbe nenion ar ve i lamma t\'fara hundi\'e9no; ar i lamma ya hlassen n\'e1ne ve \'f1andaror i tyalir \'f1andeltainen. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar lirilte vinya l\'edre epe i mahalma ar epe i coiti canta ar i amy\'e1rar, ar ua ence aiquenen pare l\'edre tana hequa i h\'fami canta *canaquean ar tuxa, i nar mancane cemello. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  T\'e9 nar i uar avahtie inte niss\'ednen, an nalte vendi. T\'e9 nar i hilyar i Eule ilya n\'f3menna ya lelyas. Anelte mancane ho mici Atani ve minye y\'e1vi Erun ar i Eulen, 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  ar huru \'fane h\'edrina antoltasse; nalte pen mordo.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 CHAPTER 14\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 And I saw, and behold! the Lamb was standing on Mount Sion, and with it four and forty and a hundred thousands [= 144,000] that have his name and the name of his Father written on their forehead. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And I heard a sound out of heaven, like the sound of many waters and like the sound of great thunder; and the sound that I heard was like harpers that play on their harps. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And they sing a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders, and it was not possible for anyone to learn that song except the four and forty and hundred thousands, that are bought [
\f1\b mancaine
\f3\b0 , \'93traded\'94] from earth. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  They are [the ones] that have not defiled themselves with women, for they are virgins. They are [the ones] that follow the Lamb every place [/wherever] it goes. They are bought [
\f1\b mancaine
\f3\b0 ] from among Men as first fruits for God and for the Lamb, 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  and lie was not found in their mouth; they are without spot.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ar cennen hyana vala v\'edla endesse menelo, arwa oira evandilyono, sa-carieryan sinwa in marir cemende, ar ilya n\'f3ren ar nossen ar lamben ar lien, 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala taura \'f3manen: \'93Ruca Erullo ar \'e1sen anta alcar, an i l\'fame n\'e1mieryo ut\'falie, ar *tyera ye carne menel cemenye ar ear ar ehteler nenwa.\'94\
	
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar exe, attea vala, hilyane qu\'e9tala: \'93Alanties! Alantie V\'e1vel T\'fara, ye tyarne ilye n\'f3ri suce i limpeo i r\'fa\uc0\u351 eva *hrupuhtaleryo!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 6 
\f3\b0 And I saw another angel fly in [the] midst of heaven, having had an eternal gospel, for him to make it known to [those] who dwell on earth, and to every nation and tribe and tongue and people, 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  saying with a mighty voice: \'93Fear God and give him glory, for the hour of his judgment has come, and worship [him] who made heaven and earth and sea and [the] springs of water.\'94
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 8
\f3\b0  And another, a second angel, followed saying: \'93She has fallen! Babylon [V\'e1vel = Babel] the Great has fallen, who caused all nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar hyana vala, neldea, hilyane tu, qu\'e9tala taura \'f3manen: \'93Qui aiquen *tyere i hravan ar emmarya, ar came i tehta timbareryasse hya m\'e1ryasse, 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  issue y\'fa sucuva i limpeo i ormeva Eruo ya n\'e1 ulyaina poica mir i yulma r\'fa\uc0\u351 eryava, ar nauvas \'f1walyaina n\'e1renen ar *ussardenen epe i airi vali ar epe i Eule. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar i usque \'f1walmelto orta ama tennoio ar oi, ar auresse yo l\'f3misse ualte same s\'e9re, i *tyerir i hravan ar emmarya, ar aiquen ye came i tehta esseryo. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  S\'eds ea maure i voronwi\'e9va i airion, i hepir i axani Eruo ar i savie Y\'e9suo.\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 9
\f3\b0  And another angel, a third, followed them, saying in a mighty voice: \'93If anyone worships the beast and its image, and receives the mark on his forehead or on his hand, 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  he shall also drink from the vine of the anger of God that is being poured [out] pure into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented by fire and sulfur before the holy angels and before the Lamb. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  And the smoke of their torment rises up forever and ever, and day and night they do not have rest, those who worship the beast and its image, and anyone who receives the mark of its name. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  Here [there] is need of the faithfulness of the holy ones, those who keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen \'f3ma et menello qu\'e9ta: \'93Teca: Valime nar i qualinar i qualir i Herusse, ho s\'ed. N\'e1, i Faire quete, lava tien sere molieltallon, an cardaltar te-hilyar.\'94\
	
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ar cennen, ar y\'e9! f\'e1na fanya, ar i fanyasse qu\'e9n ve atanyondo hamme, s\'e1mala r\'ede maltava caryasse ar aica circa m\'e1ryasse.\
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar hyana vala etelende i cordallo, y\'e1mala taura \'f3manen yenna hamme i fanyasse: \'93\'c1 menta circalya ar *cirihta, an i l\'fame y\'e1vi\'e9no ut\'falie, ar cemeno y\'e1vie manwa n\'e1.\'94 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Ar ye hamme i fanyasse mentane circarya olla cemen, ar cemen n\'e1ne *cirihtana.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 13
\f3\b0  And I heard a voice from heaven say: \'93Write: Happy are the dead who die in the Lord, from now [on]. Yes, the Spirit says, let them rest from their labors, for their deeds follow them.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 	
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  And I saw, and behold: a white cloud, and on the cloud a person like a son of man sat, having a crown of gold on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And another angel went forth from the temple, crying with a mighty voice to [him] who sat on the cloud: \'93Put your sickle in [lit. \'93send your sickle\'94, as in the Greek] and reap, for the time of harvest has come, and the harvest of earth is ripe.\'94 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  And [he] who sat on the cloud sent his sickle over the earth, and [the] earth was reaped.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Ar hyana vala etelende i cordallo ya ea menelde, y\'fa isse arwa aica circo.\
	
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Ar hyana vala etelende i *yangwallo, ye s\'e1me h\'e9re or i n\'e1re. Ar y\'e1mes taura \'f3manen yenna s\'e1me i aica circa, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1 menta aica circalya ar \'e1 comya i loxi liantasseo cemeno, an *tiumaryar nar manwe.\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ar i vala mahtane circarya cemende ar comyane i y\'e1ve liantasseo cemeno, ar sa-hante mir i hoa *limpevorma r\'fa\uc0\u351 eva Eruo. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Ettesse i osto i *limpevorma n\'e1ne *vattana, ar serce ulle i *limpevormallo ve t\'e1rave ve i *antolattar i roccoron, *restandier tuxar enque ar h\'fame oa sallo.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 17
\f3\b0  And another angel went forth from the temple that is in heaven, he too having a sharp sickle.
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  And another angel went forth from the altar, [he] who had authority over the fire. And he cried with a mighty voice to [him] who had the sharp sickle, saying: \'93Put in [lit. \'93send\'94] your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the wine of earth, for its grapes are ripe.\'94 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  And the angel used [lit. handled] his sickle on earth and gathered the fruit of the vine of earth, and threw it into the great wine-press of the wrath of God. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  Outside of the city the wine-press was trodden, and blood poured from the wine-press as high as the bridles of the horses, six hundred and a thousand [= 1,600] furlongs away from it.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 15  \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar cennen hyana tanwa menelde, t\'fara ar *elmendea: vali otso arwe ungwaleron otso, i m\'e9timar, an tainen Eruo orme n\'e1 telyana.\
	
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar cennen nat ve ailin calcava, ostimesse as n\'e1re, ar i turunelyaner i hravan ar emmarya ar esseryo n\'f3te tarner ara i ailin calcava, arwe \'f1and\'e9lion Eruva. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar lindalte i l\'edre M\'f3seo, Eruo n\'faro, ar i l\'edre i Euleo, qu\'e9tala: \'93T\'fare ar *elmendie nar cardalyar, H\'e9ru Eru, i Iluvala. Faile ar \uc0\u351 ande nar tielyar, Aran n\'f3rion. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Man ua rucuva lyello, a H\'e9ru, ar antauva alcar esselyan? An elye erinqua aire n\'e1. An ilye n\'f3ri tuluvar ar *tyeruvar epe lye, an faile n\'e1mielyar anaier apantane.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 CHAPTER 15\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 And I saw another sign in heaven, great and wonderful: seven angels having seven plagues, the last ones, for by [means of] them God\'92s anger is finished.\
	
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And I saw a thing like a lake of glass, in a blend with fire, and [those] who had conquered the beast and its image and the number of its name stood next to the lake of glass, having harps of God. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And they sing the song of Moses, God\'92s servant, and the song of the Lamb, saying: \'93Great and wonderful are your works [or, deeds], Lord God, the Almighty. Just and true are your ways, King of [the] nations. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  Who shall not fear you, o Lord, and give glory to your name? For you alone are holy. For all nations shall come and worship before you, for your righteous judgments have been revealed.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar apa nati sine cennen, ar i y\'e1na i *Lancavo *Vetti\'e9va n\'e1ne latyana menelde, 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  ar i vali otso arwe i ungwaleron otso etelender i y\'e1nallo, vaine poica, calima *p\'e1\uc0\u351 esse ar n\'fatine *os ambostelta laurie quiltainen. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar qu\'e9n i coition canta antane i valin otso tolpor otso maltava yar n\'e1ner quante i ormeo Eruo, ye coita tennoio ar oi. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar i y\'e1na n\'e1ne qu\'e1tina usqueo, i alcarnen Eruo ar t\'fareryanen, ar *\'faquen polde tule mir i y\'e1na tenna i ungwaler otso i valion otso n\'e1ner telyane.\

\f3\i \
	
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  And after these things I saw, and the sanctuary of the Tent of Witness was opened in heaven, 
\f1\b 6 
\f3\b0 and the seven angels having the seven plagues went forth from the sanctuary, clad in pure, bright linen and bound about their breast with golden girdles. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  And one of the four living cratures gave the seven angels seven bowls of gold that were full of the anger of God, who lives forever and ever. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  And the sanctuary was filled with smoke, by the glory of God and by his power, and nobody could come into the sanctuary until the seven plagues of the seven angels were finished.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 16\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar hlassen taura \'f3ma et i y\'e1nallo qu\'e9ta i valannar otso: \'93\'c1 lelya ar ulya i tolpor otso ormeva Eruo mir cemen!\'94\
	
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar i minya etelende ar ulyane tolporya mir cemen. Ar t\'faler \uc0\u351 aure ar naicalie sisti i atanissen i s\'e1mer i hravano tehta ar *tyerner emmarya.\
	
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar i attea ulyane tolporya mir ear. Ar olles serce ve i serce loicollo, ar ilya coirea onna qualle, i enger earesse.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 CHAPTER 16\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 And I heard a mighty voice from the sanctuary say to the seven angels: \'93Go and pour the seven bowls of the anger of God into earth!\'94\
	
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And the first went forth and poured his bowl into earth. And [there] came foul and painful ulcers on the men who had the mark of the beast and worshipped its image.
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And the second [one] poured his bowl into earth. And it became blood like the blood from a corpse, and every living creature died, [those] who were on earth.  
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar i neldea ulyane tolporya mir i s\'edri ar i ehteler nenwa, ar ollelte serce. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen i vala i nenion qu\'e9ta: \'93Faila nalye, i ea ar i enge, i aire, an sie an\'e1miel! 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  An ulyanelte serce airion ar Eruterc\'e1noron, ar \'e1niel tien serce sucien. Nalte valde!\'94 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen i *yangwa qu\'e9ta: \'93N\'e1, H\'e9ru Eru, i Iluvala, \uc0\u351 ande ar faile nar n\'e1mielyar!\'94\
	
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar i cantea ulyane tolporya Anarenna, ar Anaren n\'e1ne antana urta atani n\'e1rnen. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar atani n\'e1ner urtaine t\'fara \'farenen, mal huntelte i esse Eruo, ye s\'e1me h\'e9re or ungwaler sine, ar ualte hirne inwis ant\'e1ven sen alcar.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 4
\f3\b0  And the third [one] poured his bowl into the rivers and the springs of water, and they became blood. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  And I heard the angel of the waters say: \'93Righteous you are, [the one] who is and who was, the holy [one], for so you have passed judgment! 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  For they poured [out] blood of holy ones and of prophets, and you have given them blood to drink. They are worthy!\'94 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  And I heard the altar say: \'93Yes, Lord God, the Almighty, true and righteous are your judgments!\'94
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  And the fourth [one] poured his bowl upon the Sun, and [it] was given to the Sun to burn men with fire.  
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And men were being burned by a great heat, but they cursed the name of God, who had authority over these plagues, and they did not find repentance so as to give him glory.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 10
\f2\b0  Ar i lempea ulyane tolporya i mahalmanna i hravanwa. Ar aranierya morniesse n\'e9, ar queni \'f1warner lammalta i \'f1walmanen, 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  mal Eru menelo huntelte \'f1walmaltainen ar sistiltainen, ar ualte hirne inwis pa cardaltar.\

\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ar i enquea ulyane tolporya mir i hoa s\'edre Perat, ar n\'e9nya olle parca, manwien i malle i aranin anar\'f3rello.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 10
\f3\b0  And the fifth [angel] poured his bowl upon the throne of the beast. And its kingdom was in darkness, and people gnawed their tongue because of the pain, 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  but [the] God of heaven they cursed because of their pain and their ulcers, and they did not find repentance concerning their works.
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 12
\f3\b0  And the sixth [angel] poured his bowl into the great river Euphrates [
\f2\i0 Perat
\f3\i , based on Hebrew form], and its water became dry, to prepare the way for the kings from [the] sunrise.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 13
\f2\b0  Ar cennen \'fapoice fairi nelde, ve qu\'e1ci, i t\'faler et i antollo i hl\'f3ceo, ar et i antollo i hravano, ar et i antollo i *huruterc\'e1no. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  An nalte raucofairi i carir tanwali, ar etelendelte i arannar quanda Ambaro, comy\'e1ven te i ohtan i t\'fara auresse Eru Iluvalo. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  \'96 \'93Y\'e9! t\'falan ve arpo! Valima n\'e1 ye hepe inse cuiva ar hepe larmaryar, i ua mauyuva sen vanta helda ar queni cenuvar nucumnierya!\'94 \'96 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Ar comyaneltet i n\'f3messe ya Heveryasse n\'e1 estaina Armahendon.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 13
\f3\b0  And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs, who came out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  For they are demon spirits that do signs, and they go forth to the kings of all the world, to gather them for the war on the great day of God Almighty. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  \'96 \'93Behold! I am coming like a thief! Happy is [he] who keeps himself awake and keeps his garments, [so] that he will not have to walk naked and people will see his humiliation!\'94 \'96 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  And they gathered them in the place which in Hebrew is called Armageddon.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 17
\f2\b0  Ar i otsea ulyane tolporya vilyanna. Ar taura \'f3ma ett\'fale i y\'e1nallo, i mahalmallo, qu\'e9tala: \'93Amarties!\'94 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Ar enger \'edtali ar \'f3mali ar hundi\'e9li, ar martane *cempalie ta t\'fara i l\'e1 amartie s\'edte nat lan Atani am\'e1rier cemende \'96 *cempalie ta palla hya ta t\'fara. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ar i hoa osto n\'e1ne hy\'e1rina mir rantar nelde, ar atalanter i ostor i n\'f3r\'edva. Eru enyalde V\'e1vel T\'fara, ar sen-antanes i yulma i limpeo i ormeva r\'fa\uc0\u351 eryava. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Ilya tol \'fa\uc0\u351 e, ar oronti \'faner ambe h\'edrine. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Sarneli *helexeva, hoe ve \ul talenti\ulnone , lantaner undu menello i queninnar. Mal queni hunter Eru i ungwal\'e9nen *helexeva, an i ungwale r\'facima n\'e9.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 17
\f3\b0  And the seventh [one] poured his bowl upon [the] air. And a mighty voice came forth from the sanctuary, from the altar, saying: \'93It has happened!\'94 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  And there were flashes and voices and thunders, and there occurred an earthquake so great that [there] has not occurred a thing of this sort while men have been dwelling on earth \'96 an earthquake so extensive or so great. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  And the huge city was split into three parts, and the cities of the nations collapsed. God recalled Babylon the Great, and he gave her the cup of the anger of his wrath. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  Every island fled, and [the] mountains were no more found.  
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  Stones of hail, great as talents, fell down from heaven upon the people. But people cursed God because of the plague of hail, for the plague was terrible.
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 17\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar qu\'e9n i valion otso i s\'e1mer i tolpor otso t\'fale ar quente \'f3ni, qu\'e9tala: \'93Tula, tanuvan lyen i n\'e1mie i t\'fara *imbacindeva ye h\'e1ra or rimbe neneli, 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  as ye cemeno arani *hrupuhtaner, ar i marir cemende oller *limpunque *hrupuhtieryo limpenen.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 3
\f2\b0  Ar ni-colles oa i Fairesse mir i ravanda. Ar cennen n\'eds h\'e1rala mirucarne hravande quanta ession yar n\'e1ner yaiwe Eruva, arwa carion otso ar rassion quean. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  I nisso larmar n\'e1ner *luicarni ar mirucarni. ar anes netyana maltanen ar m\'edr\'ednen ar marillainen, ar m\'e1ryasse s\'e1mes yulma maltava quanta \uc0\u351 aure nation ar i \'fapoice nation *hrupuhtieryo. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar timbareryasse n\'e1ne t\'e9cina esse, f\'f3le: \'93V\'e1vel T\'fara, amil *imbacindion ar i \uc0\u351 aure nation cemeno.\'94 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ar cennen in i n\'eds n\'e1ne *limpunqua i sercenen i airion ar i sercenen i *vettoron Y\'e9suo.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 CHAPTER 17\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 And one of the seven angels that had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying: \'93Come, I will show you the judging of the great harlot who is sitting over many waters, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  with whom [the] kings of earth committed fornication, and those who dwell on earth became drunk by the wine of her fornication.
\f2\i0 \'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 3
\f3\b0  And he carried me away in the Spirit into the wilderness. And I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet [
\f1\b mirucarne,
\f3\b0  wine-red] beast full of names that were a mockery of God, having seven heads and ten horns. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  The woman's garments were purple and scarlet, and she was adorned with gold and jewels and pearls, and in her hand she had a cup of gold full of foul things and the unclean things of her fornication. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  And on her forehead was written a name, a mystery: \'93Babylon the Great, mother of harlots and the foul things of earth.\'94 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  And I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the holy ones and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus.
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 \'cdre cennenyes anen t\'fara elmendasse. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Mal i vala quente ninna: \'93Manen n\'e1 i nalye elmendasse? Nyaruvan lyen i f\'f3le i nisso ar i hravano se-c\'f3lala ar arwa i carion otso ar i rassion quean: 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  I hravan ye cennel enge, mal ea l\'e1, ananta ortuvas et i undumello ar menuva oa mir nancarie. I marir cemende, ion essi uar t\'e9cine i Parmasse Coivi\'e9va tulciello i mardeva, nauvar qu\'e1tine elmendanen \'edre cenilte manen i hravan enge, mal ea l\'e1, ananta entuluva.\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 9
\f2\b0  S\'eds ea maure handal\'e9va arwa saili\'e9no: I cari otso nar oronti otso, ar tais i n\'eds h\'e1ra. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar ear arani otso: lempe alantier, er ea s\'ed, ar i exe en ua ut\'falie, ar \'edre tuluvas, lemyuvas \uc0\u351 inta l\'famesse. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar i hravan ye enge mal ea l\'e1, n\'e1se y\'fa toltea aran; tulis i otsollo ar lelya oa mir nancarie.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 When I saw her I was in great wonder. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  But the angel said to me: \'93How [is it] that you are in wonder? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the beast carrying her and having the seven horns and the ten heads: 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  The beast that you saw was, but is not, and yet it shall rise out of the abyss and go away into destruction. Those who dwell on earth, whose names are not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the world, will be filled with wonder when they see how the beast was, but is not, and yet shall come again.
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 9
\f3\b0  Here [there] is need for intelligence with wisdom: The seven heads are seven mountains, and on them the woman is sitting. [
\f1\b Tais
\f3\b0 : short locative of 
\f1\b tai
\f3\b0 .] 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And there are seven kings: five have fallen, one is now, and the other still has not come, and when he shall come, he will remain a short time. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  And the beast that was but is not, it is also an eighth king; he comes from the seven and goes away into destruction.
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 	
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ar i rassi quean yar cennel nar arani quean, i uar en ac\'e1mie aranie, mal \'e9 camilte h\'e9re ve arani erya l\'famesse as i hravan. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Samilte i imya sanwe ar antar t\'farelta ar h\'e9relta i hravanen. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Mahtuvalte i Eulenna, mal pan n\'e1se Heru heruion ar Aran aranion, i Eule tur\'fava te, as i y\'e1linar ar *c\'edlinar ar vorondar.\'94\
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar eques ninna: \'93I neni yar cennel, yassen h\'e1ra i *imbacinde, nar lier ar \uc0\u351 angar ar n\'f3ri ar lambi. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Ar i rassi quean yar cennel, ar i hravan \'96 tevuvalte i *imbacinde ar se-caruvar lusta ar helda, ar hr\'e1verya matuvalte, ar s\'e9 urtuvalte narnen. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  An Eru panyane endaltassen care ind\'f3merya, carieltan erya sanwe ar ant\'e1veltan aranielta i hravanen, tenna Eruo quettar nar telyane. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Ar i n\'eds ye cennel i t\'fara osto n\'e1, ya same aranie or i arani cemeno.\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 12
\f3\b0  And the ten horns that you saw are ten kings, that still have not received a kingdom, but they do indeed receive authority as kings for a single hour with the beast. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  They have the same thought and give their power and their authority to the beast. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  They will fight against the Lamb, but since he is Lord of lords and King of Kings, the Lamb will conquer them, with the called and the chosen and the faithful.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 	
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And he says to me: \'93The waters that you saw, on which the harlot is sitting, are peoples and throngs and nations and tongues. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  And the ten horns that you saw, and the beast \'96 they will hate the harlot and shall make her empty and naked, and her flesh they will eat, and her they will burn with fire. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  For God put [it] in their hearts to do his will, for them to do [or, carry out] a single thought and for them to give their kingdom to the beast, until God\'92s words are accomplished [
\f1\b telyaine
\f3\b0 , \'93completed\'94]. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  And the woman whom you saw is the great city, that has a kingdom over the kings of earth.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 18\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Apa nati sine cennen hyana vala t\'fala undu menello, arwa t\'fara h\'e9reo, ar cemen n\'e1ne calyaina alcareryanen. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e1mes taura \'f3manen: \'93Alanties! Alantie V\'e1vel T\'fara, ar ol\'f3lies vehte raucoron ar mando ilya \'fapoica aiweo, ar mando ilya \'fapoica ar t\'e9vina hravano! 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  An i limpeo ormeva *hrupuhtieryo us\'facier ilye n\'f3ri, ar cemeno arani *hrupuhtaner \'f3se, ar cemeno macari oller l\'e1rie i t\'farenen \'faveryo pen landar!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 CHAPTER 18
\f2\i0\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 After these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great authority [
\f1\b h\'e9re
\f3\b0  = lordship], and earth was being illuminated by his glory. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And he cried [out] with a strong voice: \'93She has fallen! Babylon the Great has fallen, and she has become a haunt of demons and a prison of every unclean bird, and a prison of every unclean and hated beast! For of the wine of anger of her fornication all nations have drunk, and the kings of earth committed fornication with her, and the tradesmen of earth became rich by the power of her abundance without bonds!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen hyana \'f3ma et menello qu\'e9ta: \'93\'c1 lelya et sello, lienya, pustien inde samiello ranta \'f3se \'facareryassen ar camiello ungwaleryon. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  An i hahta \'facareryaiva rahta menelenna, ar Eru enai\'e1lie \'fafaile cardaryar. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  \'c1sen nan-anta tambe ve s\'e9 nan-antane, ar cara sen atwa yaron isse ac\'e1rie! Mir i yulma yanna ulyanes, \'e1 ulya atwa lesta issen! 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  S\'edve antanes alcar insen ar marne \'favesse pen landar, tambe \'e1sen anta \'f1walme ar ny\'e9re! An enderyasse quetis: \'92H\'e1ran t\'e1ri, ar verunya ua aqu\'e1lie nillo, ar uan oi istuva naire.\'92 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Etta ungwaleryar tuluvar erya auresse, qualme ar naire ar maitie, ar nauvas urtana n\'e1rnen, an polda n\'e1 i H\'e9ru Eru ye an\'e1mie se!\
\
	
\f1\i\b 4
\f3\b0  And I heard another voice from heaven say: \'93Go out from her, my people, to stop yourselves from having [any] part with her in her sins and from receiving [any] of her plagues. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  For the heap of her sins reaches to heaven, and God has recalled her unrighteous deeds. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  Give back to her as she gave back, and do to her [the] double of [the things] that she has done! Into the cup into which she poured [a drink], pour a double measure for her! 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  As she gave glory to herself and dwelt in abundance without bounds, so [= to the same extent] give her torment and grief! For in her heart she says: \'93I sit a queen, and my husband has not died from me, and I will not ever know grief.\'94 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Therefore her plagues will come in a single day, death and grief and hunger, and she will be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God who has judged her!
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar cemeno arani, i hrupuhtaner \'f3se ar marner \'f3se \'favesse pen landar, nauvar n\'edessen ar palpuvar inte nairenen sen, \'edre y\'e9talte i usque ruiveryallo. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  T\'e1ralte hairave caureltanen \'f1walmeryava ar qu\'e9tar: \'92Horro, horro, a t\'fara osto, V\'e1vel i polda osto, an erya l\'famesse n\'e1mielya ut\'falie!\'92\
\
	
\f1\i\b 9
\f3\b0  And the kings of earth, who committed fornication with her and dwelt with her in abundance without bonds, will be in tears and will beat themselves because of grief for her, when they look at the reek from her burning [
\f1\b ruive
\f3\b0 : conflagration]. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  They are standing far away in their fear of her torment and are saying: \'93Woe, woe, o great city, Babylon the strong city, for in a single hour your judgment has come!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar cemeno macari nar n\'edessen ar se-nainar, an s\'ed ea *\'faquen yen polilte vace armaltar, 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  armar ve malta ar telpe ar m\'edri ar marillar ar m\'e1ra *p\'e1\uc0\u351 e ar *luicarne ar samin ar mirucarne, ar ilya n\'ed\u351 ima tavar ar ilya vene *mortavarwa ar ilya vene ammaira tavarwa ar urus ar anga ar alas, 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  ar \ul cinnamon\ulnone  ar \ul amomum\ulnone  ar *nisque ar n\'ed\uc0\u351 ima millo ar *ninquima ar limpe ar *piemillo ar mulma ar ore ar yaxir ar m\'e1mar, ar roccor ar luncar ar m\'f3li \'96 coirie queni. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  \'c9 i m\'e1ra y\'e1ve ya n\'e1ne fealyo \'edre oantie lyello, ar ilye i netye nati ar i calwe nati nar vanwe lyen, ar mo ua oi enhiruva tai.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 11
\f3\b0  And the tradesmen of earth are in tears and lament her, for now there is nobody to whom they can sell their goods, 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  goods like gold and silver and jewels and fine linen and purple and silk and scarlet, and every fragrant wood and every vessel of ivory and every vessel of most precious wood and copper and iron and marble, 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  and cinnamon and amomum [Indian spice] and frankincense and wine and olive oil and fine floor and grain and cows and sheep, and horses and wagons and slaves \'96 living persons. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  Indeed the good fruit that was your soul's desire has passed away from you, and all the dainty things and the beautiful things are lost to you, and one will not ever find them again.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  I macari mancala sine nati, i n\'e1ner c\'e1rine l\'e1rie sello, taruvar hairave caureltanen \'f1walmeryava ar nauvar niessen ar samuvar naire, 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'92Horro, horro \'96 i t\'fara osto, vaina mi *p\'e1\uc0\u351 e ar *luicarne ar mirucarne, ar netyana maltanen ar m\'edrenen ar marillanen, 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  an erya l\'famesse lar ta t\'fara nancarna n\'e9!\'92\
\
	
\f1\i\b 15
\f3\b0  The tradesmen trading [in] these things, who were made rich from her, will stand far away in their fear of her torment and will be in tears and shall have grief, 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  saying: \'91Woe, woe \'96 the great city, clad in linen and purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold and jewel and pearl, 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  for in a single hour riches so great were destroyed!\'92 [
\f1\b nancarna
\f3\b0 , \'93undone\'94; also notice that 
\f1\b lar
\f3\b0  \'93riches\'94 is singular in Quenya.]
\f2\i0 \
\
	Ar ilya hesto ar ilquen ye lelya ciryanen, ar ciryamor ar illi i m\'f3tar earesse, tarner hairave 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  ar y\'e1mer \'edre yentelte i usque ruiveryallo ar quenter: \'92Man mici ostor n\'e1 ve i t\'fara osto?\'92 
\f0\b 19 
\f2\b0 Ar hantelte asto careltanna ar y\'e1mer mi nier ar naire, ar quenter: \'92Horro, horro \'96 i t\'fara osto, yasse illi i samir ciryar earesse oller l\'e1rie t\'fara almaryanen, an erya l\'famesse anes nancarna!\'92\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 20
\f2\b0  Na valime issenen, a menel ar i airi ar i aposteli ar i Eruterc\'e1nor, an eldenen Eru equ\'e9tie n\'e1mie senna!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 	
\f3\i And every captain and everyone who travels by ship, and mariners and all who work at sea, stood far away 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  and cried [out] when they looked at the reek from her burning and said: \'91Who among cities is like the great city?\'92 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  And they threw dust upon their head and cried [out] in tears and grief, and said: \'91Woe, woe \'96 the great city, where all who have ships at sea became rich by her great wealth, for in a single hour she was destroyed!\'92
\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 	
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  Be glad because of her, o heaven and the holy ones and the apostles and the prophets, for because of [-
\f1\b nen
\f3\b0 ] you God has pronounced judgment against her!\'94
\f2\i0 \
	\
	
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Ar polda vala ortane haura *mulondo ar sa-hante mir ear, qu\'e9tala: \'94Sie, lintave, V\'e1vel T\'fara nauva h\'e1tina undu, ar uas oi nauva enhirna. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Ar i lamma \'f1andaroron ar nyelloron ar simpetarion ar *hy\'f3lamoron laume nauva hl\'e1rina lyesse ambe, ar tanor ilye curwion laume nauvar h\'edrine lyesse ambe, ar i lamma *mulondollo laume nauva hl\'e1rina lyesse ambe, 
\f0\b 23 
\f2\b0 ar cala calmo laume caltuva lyesse ambe, ar \'f3ma endero hya indisso laume nauva hl\'e1rina lyesse ambe; an macarilyar n\'e1ner i minde neri cemeno, an \'f1\'falelyanen ilye n\'f3ri n\'e1ner ty\'e1rine vare. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Ente, sesse n\'e1ne h\'edrina i serce Eruterc\'e1n\'f3lion ar airilion ar illion i n\'e1ner nahtane cemende.\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 21
\f3\b0  And a strong angel lifted up a huge mill-stone and threw it into [the] sea, saying: \'93Thus, quickly, Babylon the Great will be thrown down, and she will not ever be found again. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  And the sound of harpers and singers and flutists and trumpeters will by no means be heard in you [any]more, and craftsmen of all crafts will by no means be found in you [any]more, and the sound from a mill-stone will by no means heard in you [any]more, 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  and light of a lamp will by no means shine in you [any]more; for your tradesmen were the prominent men of earth, and by your sorcery all nations were caused to err. 
\f1\b 24 
\f3\b0 Furthermore, in her was found the blood of prophets and holy ones and of all who were killed in earth.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 19\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Apa nati sine hlassen ya n\'e9 ve taura \'f3ma haura rimbeo menelde. Quentelte: \'93Hallel\'faya! I rehtie ar i alcar ar i t\'fare nar Ainolvo, 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  an \uc0\u351 ande ar faile nar n\'e1mieryar! An an\'e1mies i t\'fara *imbacinde ye hastane cemen *hrupuhtieryanen, ar Eru atac\'e1rie n\'faroryaron serce et m\'e1ryallo.\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar mi attea l\'fa quentelte: \'93Hallel\'faya! Ar i usque sello orta ama tennoio ar oi!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 19\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
After these things I heard [something] that was like a mighty voice of a huge multitude in heaven. They said: \'93Hallelujah! The salvation and the glory and the power are our God\'92s, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  for true and just are his judgments! For he has judged the great harlot who marred the earth with her fornication, and God has avenged his servants\'92 blood out of her hand. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And [for] the second time they said: \'93Hallelujah! And the reek from her rises up forever and ever!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar i amy\'e1rar canta *y\'faquean ar i coiti canta lantaner undu ar *tyerner Eru i h\'e1rane i mahalmasse, ar quenter: \'93N\'e1sie! Hallel\'faya!\'94\
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar \'f3ma t\'fale i mahalmallo, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1 laita Ainolva, ilye n\'faroryar i rucir sello, i pityar yo i t\'farar!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 4
\f3\b0  And the four and twenty elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who was sitting on the throne, and said: \'93Amen! Hallelujah!\'94
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  And a voice came from the throne, saying: \'93Praise our God, all his servants who fear him, the small and the great!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen ya n\'e1ne ve \'f3ma hoa \uc0\u351 ango ar ve lamma rimbe nenion ar ve lamma polde hundi\'e9ron. qu\'e9tala: \'93Hallel\'faya, an i H\'e9ru Ainolva anaie carna aran, i Iluvala! 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Alve na valime ar same alasse, ar alve anta sen i alcar, an i Euleo veryanwe ut\'falie, ar vesserya amanwiexe. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar n\'e1ne sen antana n\'e1ve vaina calima, poica *p\'e1\uc0\u351 esse, an i *p\'e1\u351 e i faile cardar i airion n\'e1.\'94\
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar nyaris nin: \'93Teca: Valime i nar tultane i merendenna i veryanweo i Euleo!\'94 Ente, eques ninna: \'93Sine nar i nanwe quettar Eruo.\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 6
\f3\b0  And I heard [something] that was like a voice of a huge multitude and like [the] sound of many waters and like the sound of strong thunders, saying: \'93Hallelujah, for the Lord our God has been made king, the Almighty! 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  Let us be happy and have joy, and let us give him the glory, for the wedding of the Lamb has come, and his wife has prepared herself. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  And [it] was given her to be clad in bright, pure linen, for the linen is the righteous deeds of the holy ones.\'94
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And he tells me: \'93Write: Happy [those] who are invited to the feast of the wedding of the Lamb!\'94 Furthermore, he said to me: \'93These are the true words of God.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar lantanen undu epe taluryat *tyerien se. Mal nyaris nin: \'93Cima! \'c1va care! Nanye rie n\'faro as ly\'e9 ar h\'e1nolyar, i samir i *vettie Y\'e9suo! Eru alye *tyere!\'94 An i *vettie Y\'e9suo n\'e1 i apac\'e9no faire.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 10
\f3\b0  And I fell down before his feet to worship him. But he says to me: \'93Take heed! Do not do [it]! I am solely a servant with you and your brothers, who have the witness of Jesus! God you are to worship!\'94 For the witness of Jesus is the spirit of the prophecy.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar cennen menel latyana, ar y\'e9! ninque rocco! Ar ye hamme sesse n\'e1 estaina Voronda ar \uc0\u350 anda, ar namis ar mahtas failiesse. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Henduryat n\'e1t ve uruite ruine, ar caryasse ear rimbe *\uc0\u351 arnuntali. Samis esse t\'e9cina ya *\'faquen ista hequa issue erinqua. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  N\'e1se vaina collasse sumbana sercesse, ar i esse yanen n\'e1se estaina Eruo Quetta n\'e1. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Menelo hossi se-hilyaner ninqui roccossen ar vaine mi ninque ar poica *p\'e1\uc0\u351 e. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar et antoryallo mene aica andamacil, yanen petuvas n\'f3ri, ar tai-turuvas angaina vandilden. *Vattas i *limpevorma i ormeva i r\'fa\uc0\u351 eva Eru Iluvalo. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Ar collaryasse, tiucoryasse, samis esse t\'e9cina: Aran Aranion ar Heru Heruion.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 11
\f3\b0  And I saw heaven opened, and behold! a white horse. And [he] who sat on it was called Faithful and True, and he judges and he fights in righteousness. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  His eyes are like burning fire, and on his head are many diadems. He has a name written that nobody knows except he alone. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  He is clad in a cloak dipped in blood, and the name by which he is called is God\'92s Word. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  Heaven\'92s armies followed him on white horses and clad in white and pure linen. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And from his mouth [there] goes a sharp longsword, with which he will strike [the] nations, and he will rule them with an iron rod. He treads the wine-press of the anger of the wrath of God Almighty. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  And on his cloak, on his thigh, he has a name written: King of Kings and Lord of Lords.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Ar cennen vala t\'e1rala Anaresse, ar y\'e1mes taura \'f3manen ar quente ilye aiwennar i vilir menelo endesse: \'93Tula, \'f3coma Eruo t\'fara merendenna, 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  matien hr\'e1ve aranion, hr\'e1ve c\'e1noron ar hr\'e1ve polde nerion, hr\'e1ve roccoron ar ion hammer tesse, i hr\'e1ve illion, l\'e9raron ar m\'f3lion, pityaron yo t\'fararon.\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 17
\f3\b0  And I saw an angel standing in the Sun, and he cried in a mighty voice and said to all birds who fly in the midst of heaven: \'93Come, gather for God\'92s great feast, 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  to eat flesh of kings, flesh of commanders and flesh of strong men, flesh of horses and of [those] who sat on them, the flesh of all, of rich ones and of slaves, of small ones and great ones.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ar cennen i hravan ar cemeno arani ar hosseltar comyane ohtacarien yenna hamme i roccosse ar hosseryanna. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Ar i hravan n\'e1ne mapana, ar as s\'e9 i *huruterc\'e1no ye carne i tanwar epe se, yainen tyarnes vare i camner i tehta i hravano ar *tyerner emmarya. Anette y\'fayo h\'e1tine coirie mir i ailin n\'e1reva ya urya *ussardenen. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  I exi n\'e1ner nahtane i andamacilden ya lende et antollo yeo hamme i roccosse, ar ilye i aiwi n\'e1ner qu\'e1tine hr\'e1veltanen.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 19
\f3\b0  And I saw the beast and the kings of earth and their armies gathered to make war upon [he] who sat on the horse and upon his army. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  And the beast was seized, and with it the false prophet who did the signs before it, by which it caused to err [those] who received the sign of the beast and worshiped its image. They were both thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulphur. 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  The others were killed by the sword that went out of the mouth of [him] who sat upon the horse, and all the birds were filled with their flesh.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 20\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar cennen vala t\'fala undu et menello arwa i *latilo i undumeo ar hoa naxa m\'e1ryasse. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar nampes i hl\'f3ce, i y\'e1ra leuca, ye i Arauco ar S\'e1tan n\'e1, ar avaleryane h\'e9 loain h\'fame. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar hantes h\'e9 mir i undume ar sa-holtane ar sa-*lihtane or h\'e9, pustien h\'e9 tyariello n\'f3ri vare n\'f3 i h\'fame loar n\'e1ner vanwe. Epeta h\'e9 nauva leryana \uc0\u351 inta l\'famen.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 CHAPTER 20\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 And I saw an angel come down out of heaven having the key to the abyss and a huge chain in his hand. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And he took the dragon, the ancient serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And he threw him into the abyss and closed it and sealed it over him, to stop him from causing [the] nations to stray before the thousand years were passed. After that he will be freed for a short time.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar cennen mahalmali, ar enger i hamuner tais, ar n\'e1mot\'fare n\'e1ne ten antana. Ar cennen i fear ion n\'e1ner nahtane pelecconen *vetti\'e9nen pa Y\'e9sus ar queti\'e9nen pa Eru, ar ion uar *ety\'e9rie i hravan hya emmarya ar uar ac\'e1mie i tehta timbareltasse hya m\'e1ltasse. T\'falelte coivienna ar turner as Hristo ter i loar h\'fame. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  I exi i qualinaron uar t\'fale coivienna n\'f3 i loar h\'fame n\'e1ner vanwe. Si i minya enortie n\'e1. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Valima ar aire n\'e1 ye same ranta i minya enortiesse. Or t\'e9 i attea \'f1uru ua same h\'e9re, mal nauvalte *airimor Eruo ar Hristo, ar turuvalte \'f3se ter i loar h\'fame.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 4
\f3\b0  And I saw thrones, and [there] were those who sat down on them, and power of judgment was given to them. And I saw the souls of [those] who were slain by axe for witnessing about Jesus and for speaking about God, and of [those] who have not worshipped the beast or its image and have not received the sign on their forehead or their hand. They came to life and ruled with Christ for a thousand years. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  The others [or, the rest] of the dead did not come to life before the thousand years were passed. This is the first resurrection. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  Happy and holy is [the one] who has a part in the first resurrection. Over them the second death does not have authority, but they shall be priests of God and Christ, and they shall rule with him through the thousand years.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  \'cdre i loar h\'fame av\'e1nier, S\'e1tan nauva leryana mandoryallo. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Etelelyuvas tyarien vare i n\'f3ri i vincassen canta cemeno, C\'f3c yo M\'e1coc, te-comy\'e1ven i ohtan, \'fan\'f3time ve earo litse. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Lendelte ama olla i palla cemen ar pelder i *estolie i air\'edva ar i melda osto. Mal n\'e1r t\'fale undu menello ar te-ammante. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar i Arauco ye tyarne te vare n\'e1ne h\'e1tina mir i ailin n\'e1rwa ar *ussarneva, yasse y\'fayo i hravan ar i *huruterc\'e1no enget, ar nauvalte \'f1walyaine auresse yo l\'f3misse tennoio.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 7
\f3\b0  When the thousand years have passed, Satan will be freed from his prison. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  He will go forth to cause to err the nations in the four corners of earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them for the war, countless like the sand of [the] sea. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  They went up over the broad earth and surrounded the camp of the holy ones and the beloved city. But fire came down from heaven and consumed them. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And the Devil who caused them to err was thrown into the lake of fire and sulphur, where both the beast and the false prophet were, and they shall be tormented at day and at night forever.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar cennen t\'fara ninque mahalma ar ye hande sasse. Cendeleryallo cemen yo menel \'fa\uc0\u351 et oa, ar n\'f3me \'fane h\'edrina t\'fan. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Cennen y\'fa qualinar, i t\'farar yo i pityar, t\'e1rala epe i mahalma, ar parmali n\'e1ner latyane. T\'e1 n\'e1ne latyana hyana parma, ya i Parma Coivi\'e9va n\'e1. Ar qualinar n\'e1ner n\'e1mine i natinen t\'e9cine i parmassen, ve cardaltar. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Ar ear antane nan i qualinar sasse, ar \'f1uru ar Mandos antaner nan i qualinar mi t\'fa, ar anelte n\'e1mine, ilquen ve cardaryar n\'e1ner. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ar \'f1uru ar Mandos n\'e1ner h\'e1tine mir i ailin n\'e1rwa. Si i attea \'f1uru n\'e1: i ailin n\'e1rwa. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar qui aiquen \'fane hirna t\'e9cina i Parmasse Coivi\'e9va, anes h\'e1tina mir i ailin n\'e1rwa.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 11
\f3\b0  And I saw a great white throne and [he] who sat on it. From his face earth and heaven fled away, and place was not found for them [/no place was found for them]. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  I saw also [the] dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. Then was opened another book, which is the Book of Life. And [the] dead were judged by the things written in the books, according to their deeds. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  And [the] sea gave back the dead in it, and death and Mandos [Hades] gave back the dead in them, and they were judged, everyone as his deeds were. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  And death and Mandos were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death: the lake of fire. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And if anyone was not found written in the Book of Life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 21  \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar cennen vinya menel yo vinya cemen, an i minya menel yo i minya cemen n\'e1net vanwe, ar ear ua ambe enge. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Cennen y\'fa i aire osto, Vinya Yer\'fasalem, t\'fala undu et menello, manwana ve indis netyana veruryan. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar hlassen taura \'f3ma i mahalmallo qu\'e9ta: \'93Y\'e9! I m\'e1r Eruva ea as Atani, ar maruvas aselte, ar nauvalte lieryar. Ar Eru immo euva aselte. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Mapuvas oa ilya nie hendultalto, ar \'f1uru ua ambe euva; y\'fa naire ar rambe ar \'f1walma uar ambe euvar. I noe nati av\'e1nier.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\i \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 21\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth were gone, and [the] sea was no more. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  I saw also the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And I heard a mighty voice from the throne say: \'93Behold! The home of God is with Men, and he shall dwell with them, and they shall be his peoples. And God himself shall be with them. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  He will take away every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more; also grief and outcry and pain will be no more. The former things have passed away.\'94  
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar ye hande i mahalmasse quente: \'93Y\'e9! Envinyatan ilye nati!\'94 Ar eques: \'93Teca, an quettar sine nar voronde ar \uc0\u351 ande!\'94 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ar quentes ninna: \'93Nas c\'e1rina! Inye Tinco ar \'dare, i yesse yo i metta. Ilquenen ye soica n\'e1 inye antauva i ehtelello i nenwa coivi\'e9va, muntan. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Aiquen ye turue nauva aryon sine nation; inye nauva Ainorya, ar isse nauva yondonya. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Mal i caurear ar i \'fasavilar ar i \uc0\u351 aurar ar i nehtari ar i *hrupuhtandor ar i carir \'f1\'fale ar i *tyerir cordoni, ar ilye *hurindor \'96 masselta ea i ailinde uryala n\'e1rnen ar *ussarnenen. Si i attea \'f1uru n\'e1.\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 5
\f3\b0  And [he] who sat on the throne said: \'93Behold! I make all things new!\'94 And he says: \'93Write, for these words are faithful and true!\'94 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  And he said to me: \'93It is done! I [am] Tinco and \'dare [= Alpha and Omega], the beginning and the end. To everyone who is thirsty I will give from the spring of the water of life, for nothing. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  Anyone who conquers shall be heir to these things; I will be his God, and he will be my son. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  But the cowards and the unbelieving and the disgusting ones and the murderers and the fornicators and those who practice sorcery and worship idols, and all liars \'96 their portion is in the lake burning with fire and sulfur. This is the second death.\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Qu\'e9n i valion otso i s\'e1mer i tolpor otso quante i m\'e9time ungwaleron otso t\'fale quetien \'f3ni ar quente: \'93Tula! Lyen-tanuvan i indis, i Euleo veri.\'94 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Fairenen coldesen oa hoa ar t\'e1ra orontenna, ar tannes nin i aire osto Yer\'fasalem t\'falala undu et menello, Erullo, 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  ar samila i alcar Eruo. \'d1altarya n\'e1 ve ammaira m\'edre, ve *namb\'edre caltala ve maril. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  S\'e1mes hoa ar t\'e1ra ramba ar andor yunque, ar ara i andor vali yunque, ar i andossen n\'e1ner t\'e9cine i essi i nossion yunque Israelindion: 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  andor nelde R\'f3menna, andor nelde Formenna, andor nelde Hyarmenna, ar andor nelde N\'famenna. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ar i ostoramba s\'e1me *talmondor yunque, ar t\'e9cine tais enger i essi i apostelion yunque i Euleo.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 9
\f3\b0  One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues came to speak with me and said: \'93Come! I will show you the bride, the Lamb\'92s wife.\'94 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  By spirit he carried me away to a huge and tall mountain, and he showed me the holy city [of] Jerusalem coming down out of heaven, from God, 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  and having the glory of God. Its radiance was like a most precious jewel, a jasper shining like glass. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  It had a huge and tall wall and twelve gates, and beside the gates twelve angels, and on the gates were written the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel: 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  three gates to [the] East, three gates to [the] North, three gates to [the] south, and three gates to [the] West. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  And the city wall has twelve foundation stones, and written on them were the names of the apostles of the Lamb.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar ye carampe ninna s\'e1me ve lesta maltasirpe, polieryan *lesta i osto ar andoryar ar rambarya. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  I osto *cantil n\'e1, ar nas ve anda ve n\'e1s palla. Ar *lestanes i osto i sirpenen, *restandier h\'fami yunque; andierya ar pallierya ar t\'e1rierya nar imye. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  *Lestanes y\'fa rambarya, *perrangar canta *canaquean ar tuxa, i lestanen atano, ar y\'fa valo.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 15
\f3\b0  And [he] who spoke to me had as a measure a golden rod, for him to be able to measure the city and its gates and its wall. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  The city is a square, and it is as long as it is wide. And he measured the city with the rod, twelve thousand furlongs; its length and its width and its height are [the] same. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  He measured also its wall, a hundred and forty-four cubits, by the measure of man, and also an angel\'92s.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  I ramba n\'e1ne c\'e1rina *namb\'edreva, ar i osto n\'e1ne poica malta, ve poica cilin. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  I talmar i ostorambo n\'e1ner netyane ilya nostal\'e9nen m\'edrion: I minya *talmondo *namb\'edre n\'e9, i attea l\'fale, i neldea *ostimmir, i cantea *laimaril, 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  i lempea *fanorcarne, i enquea *culm\'edre, i otsea *malatsar, i toltea elessar, i nertea *sinile, i quainea *orvamir, i minquea *linquemir, ar i yunquea *helissar.\
	
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Ente, i andor yunque n\'e1ner marillar yunque; ilya ando n\'e1ne er marilla. Ar i osto malle n\'e1ne poica malta, ve *terc\'e9nima calca.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 18
\f3\b0  The wall was made of jasper, and the city was pure gold, like pure glass. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  The foundations of the city wall were adorned with every kind of jewels: The first foundation stone was a jasper, the second sapphire, the third agate, the fourth emerald, 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh hyacinth, and the twelfth amethyst.
\f2\i0 \
	
\f1\i\b 21
\f3\b0  Furthermore, the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every gate was one pearl. And the street of the city was pure gold, as transparent glass.
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i \
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 	
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Ar uan cenne corda sasse, an i H\'e9ru Eru Iluvala cordarya n\'e1, ar sie n\'e1 i Eule. 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  I osto ua same maure Anarwa hya I\uc0\u351 ilwa caltien sanna, an Eruo alcar sa-calyane, ar calmarya i Eule n\'e9. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Ar n\'f3ri vantuvar i calanen i ostollo, ar cemeno arani taluvar alcarelta minna sa. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Ar andoryar laume nauvar holtane auresse, an l\'e1 euva l\'f3me tasse. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Ar taluvalte i n\'f3rion alcar ar *laitie minna sa. 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Mal aiqua \'faaire ar aiquen ye care \uc0\u351 aura nat ar huru ua tuluva minna sa, mal rie i nar t\'e9cine i parmasse coivi\'e9va i Euleva.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 22
\f3\b0  And I did not see [any] temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and so is the Lamb. 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  The city does not have need of Sun or Moon to shine upon it, for God\'92s glory illuminated it, and its lamp was the Lamb. 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  And [the] nations shall walk by the light from the city, and the kings of earth will bring their glory into it. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  And its gates will by no means be shut at day, for there will not be night there. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  And they shall send the glory and honor of the nations into it. 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  But anything unholy and anybody who practices a disgusting thing and a lie will not come into it, but solely [those] who are written in the book of life of the Lamb.  
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 RANTA 22\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\b0 \cf0 Ar tannes nin s\'edre i nenwa coivi\'e9va, *terc\'e9nima ve maril, sirila i mahalmallo Eruva ar i Euleva, 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  i endesse i palla malleo i ostosse. Ar foryasse ar hyaryasse i s\'edreo enge i Alda Coivi\'e9va ye cole y\'e1ve l\'far yunque, antala y\'e1verya ilya astasse. Ar i Aldo lassi nar i nestien n\'f3riva.\
	
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  L\'e1 ambe euva erya nat ya h\'fana n\'e1. Mal i mahalma Eruva ar i Euleva euva tasse, ar n\'faroryar se-*veuyuvar. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Cenuvalte cendelerya, ar esserya euva timbareltasse. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar l\'f3me l\'e1 ambe euva, ar ualte samuva maure calava calmo hya calava Anaro, an i H\'e9ru Eru te-calyuva, ar turuvalte tennoio ar oi.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 CHAPTER 22\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
And he showed me a river of the water of life, transparent like crystal, flowing out from the throne of God and of the Lamb, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  in the midst of the broad street in the city. And to the right and to the left of the river was the Tree of Life that bears fruit twelve times, giving its fruit every month. And the leaves of the Tree were for the healing of [the] nations.
\f2\i0 \

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  [There] will no more be a single thing that is cursed. But God\'92s throne and the Lamb\'92s will be there, and his servants will serve him. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  They will see his face, and his name will be on their forehead. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  And night will be no more, and they will not have need of light of a lamp or light of Sun, for the Lord God shall illuminate them, and they will rule forever and ever.
\f2\i0 \
\
	
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Ar eques ninna: \'93Quettar sine nar voronde ar \uc0\u351 ande. I H\'e9ru, i Aino fairion i Eruterc\'e1noron, ementaye valarya tan\'e1ven n\'faroryain yar ron martuvar. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Y\'e9! tuluvan ron! Valima n\'e1 ye cime i quettar i apac\'e9no parma sino.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 8 
\f2\b0 Ar inye Yoh\'e1no n\'e1ne ye hlasse ar cenne nati sine. Ar apa hlarie ar cenie, lantanen undu *tyerien epe talu i valo ye nin-tanne nati sine. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Mal quetis ninna: \'94Cima! \'c1va care! Nanye hyana n\'faro as ly\'e9 ar h\'e1nolyar i nar Eruterc\'e1nor, ar as i cimir i quettar parma sino! *Tyera Eru!\'94  \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 6
\f3\b0  And he said to me: \'93These words are faithful and true. The Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent his angel to show his servants [the] things that soon will happen. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  See! I will come soon! Happy is [he] who heeds the words of the prophecy of this book.\'94
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 8
\f3\b0  And I John was [the one] who heard and saw these things. And after hearing and seeing, I fell down to worship before [the] feet of the angel who showed me these things. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  But he says to me: \'93Take heed! Do not do [it]! I am another servant with you and your brothers who are prophets, and with [the ones] who heed the words of this book! Worship God!\'94
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 10
\f2\b0  Ar quetis ninna: \'94\'c1va *lihta i quettar i apac\'e9no parma sino, an i l\'fame hare n\'e1. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Yen care \'fafailie lava care \'fafailie en; ar i v\'e1ran lava ole v\'e1ra en; mal lava i failan care failie en, ar lava yen aire n\'e1 ole aire en.\

\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Y\'e9! Tuluvan ron, ar ya paityan ea asinye, ant\'e1ven nan ilquenen ve molierya n\'e1. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Inye Tinco ar \'dare, i minya ar i m\'e9tima, i yesta ar i metta. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Valime nar i sovir collaltar, i lertuvalte tule i Aldanna Coivi\'e9va ar lelya mir i osto ter i andor. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  I ettesse ear i huor ar i carir \'f1\'fale ar i *hrupuhtandor ar i nehtari ar illi i melir ar carir huru.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 10
\f3\b0  And he says to me: \'93Do not seal [up] the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  Let [the one] who does unrighteousness, do unrighteousness still; and let the dirty one become dirty still; but let the righteous one do righteousness still, and let the holy one become holy still.
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 12
\f3\b0  Behold! I shall come soon, and what I pay is with me, in order to give back to everyone as his work is. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  I [am] Tinco and \'dare [Alpha and Omega], the first and the last, the beginning and the end. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  Happy are [the ones] who wash their coats, that they may come to the Tree of Live and go into the city through the gates. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  On the outside are the dogs and those who do magic and the fornicators and the murderers and all who love and practice a lie.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 16
\f2\b0  Inye Y\'e9sus mentane valanya *vettien lyen pa nati sine i ocombin. Inye Laviro \uc0\u351 undo ar erde n\'e1, ar i calima arintinwe.\'94\

\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  I Faire ar i indis qu\'e9tar: \'93Tula!\'94 Ar lava yen hlare quete: \'93Tula!\'94 Ar lava i soican tule; lava yen mere, mapa i n\'e9n coivi\'e9va muntan.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 16
\f3\b0  I Jesus sent my angel to witness to you about these things for the congregations. I am David\'92s root and seed, and the bright morning star.\'94
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 17
\f3\b0  The Spirit and the bride are saying: \'93Come!\'94And let [the one] who hears say: \'93Come!\'94 And let the thirsty one come; let the one who wishes, take the water of life for nothing.
\f2\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 18
\f2\b0  Inye *vetta ilquenen i hlarir i quettar i apac\'e9no parma sino: Qui aiquen napane sine natinnar, Eru napanuva senna i ungwaler pa yar n\'e1 t\'e9cina parma sinasse; 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  ar qui aiquen mapa *aiqua oa i quettallon i apac\'e9no parma sino, Eru mapuva oa rantarya i Aldasse Coivi\'e9va ar i aire ostosse, pa yar n\'e1 t\'e9cina parma sinasse.\

\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Ye *vetta pa sine nati quete: \'93N\'e1, tuluvan ron!\'94 N\'e1sie! Tula, a Heru Y\'e9sus!\

\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Nai i Heru Y\'e9sus Hristo lisse euva as i airi!\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 18
\f3\b0  I witness to everyone who hear the words of the prophecy of this book: If anyone adds to these things, God will add to him the plagues about which [it] is written in this book; 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  and if anyone takes anything away from the words of the prophecy of this book, God will take away his part in the Tree of Life and the in the holy city, about which [it] is written in this book.
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 20
\f3\b0  [He] who bears witness about these things says: \'93Yes, I shall come soon!\'94 Amen! Come, O Lord Jesus!
\f2\i0 \

\f1\i\b 21
\f3\b0  May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with the holy ones!
\f2\i0 \
}