{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldItalicMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgenericrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12600\viewh7800\viewkind0
\deftab709
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs32 \cf0 Evandilyon L\'facasso\

\f1\b0\fs24 \
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 THE GOSPEL OF LUKE [, or LUCAS]\
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 \
\

\f0\b RANTA 1
\f1\b0  \
Pan rimbali am\'e1pier mir m\'e1 *partie nyarna pa i nati yar amartier mici me, 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  ve ac\'e1mielmet illon minyave n\'e1ner astarmoli ar n\'faroli i quetto,
\f0\b  3
\f1\b0  *\uc0\u351 \'e9ne m\'e1ra yando nin, apa hilie ilye nati harive i yestallo, tece tai ve l\'famequenta elyen, alcarinqua \u350 eof\'edlo, 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  istielyan i tanca talma i nation pa yar anaiel peantaina.\
	
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Auressen Herolo, aran Y\'fareo, enge *airimo estaina Secar\'eda, i *cilti\'e9no Avio, ar s\'e1mes veri \'c1rono yeldion, ar esserya n\'e1ne El\'edsavet. 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Ar anette y\'fayo faile epe Eru, vantala ilye i axanissen ar \uc0\u351 anyessen mi ilvana l\'e9. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Mal ua enge h\'edna asette, an El\'edsavet ua polle nosta, ar y\'fayo s\'e1met rimbe loali. \

\f0\b \

\f2\i CHAPTER 1\

\f3\b0 Since numerous ones have taken into hand to compose an account about the things that have happened among us, 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  as we received them from [those] who first were witnesses and servants of the word, 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  it seemed good also to me, after following all things closely from the beginning, to write them as chronological account for you, glorious Theophilus, 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  for you to know the firm foundation of the things about which you have been instructed.\
	
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  In the days of Herod, king of Judea, [there] was a priest called Zechariah, of the division of Abiah, and he had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth. 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and laws in a perfect manner. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  But [there] was not [any] child with them, for Elizabeth could not conceive, and both had [an age of] many years.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  I l\'fa t\'fale *ciltieryanna, ar carnes i *airimo molie epe Eru. 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Hati\'e9nen \uc0\u351 anwali, ve i *airimoron l\'e9 n\'e1ne, lantane senna mene mir i H\'e9ruo y\'e1na urtien *nisque. 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Ar i quanda rimbe i lieo tarne hyamiesse i ettesse i l\'famesse urti\'e9va *nisque.\

\f0\b 	11
\f1\b0  T\'e1 i H\'e9ruo vala tannexe sen, t\'e1rala foryasse i *yangwava *nisqueva. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Mal Secar\'eda n\'e1ne *tarastaina ceni\'e9nen se, ar caure lantane senna. 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Mal i vala quente senna: \'93\'c1va ruce, Secar\'eda, an arcandelya anaie hl\'e1rina, ar El\'edsavet verilya nauva amil yondon lyen, ar alye anta sen i esse Yoh\'e1no.  
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Ar samuval alasse ar m\'e1rie, ar rimbali nauvar valime pan anaies n\'f3na,\
\
	
\f2\i\b 8
\f3\b0  The turn [
\f2\b l\'fa
\f3\b0 : occasion] came to his division, and he did the priest's work before God. 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  By throwing lots, as the custom of the priests was, it fell upon him to go into God's santuary to burn incence.  
\f2\b 10 
\f3\b0 And the entire multitude of the people stood in prayer on the outside at the hour of burning incence. \
	
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  Then the Lord's angel showed himself to him, standing at the right of the altar of incence. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  But Zechariah was troubled at seeing him, and fear fell upon him. 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  But the angel said to him: \'93Do not fear, Zechariah, for your petition has been heard, and Elizabeth your wife will be mother to a son to you, and you are to give him the name John. 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  And you will have joy and happiness, and numerous ones will be happy since he has been born,\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  an nauvas t\'fara epe i H\'e9ru, ar limpe ar polda yulda \'e1vas suce, ar nauvas qu\'e1tina Aire Feanen aqua et amilleryo m\'f3nallo. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ar rimbali yondoron Isra\'e9lo *nanqueruvas i H\'e9ru Ainoltanna, 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  ar s\'e9 menuva epe se mi El\'edo faire ar t\'fare, *nanquerien atarion endar h\'ednannar ar i avari i tercenna failaron, panien epe i H\'e9ru manwaina lie.\'94\
	
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ar Secar\'eda quente i valanna: \'93Manen polin ista nat sina? An nanye y\'e1ra, ar verinya same rimbe loali.\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse i vala quente senna: \'93Inye Avriel, ye tare epe Eru, ar anen *etementaina carpien aselye ar carien i m\'e1re sinyar pa nati sine sinwe lyen. 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Mal y\'e9! nauval quilda ar ua poluva quete tenna i aure yasse nati sine martuvar, pan ual s\'e1ve quettanyassen, yar nauvar c\'e1rine nanwe l\'fameltasse.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 15
\f3\b0  for he will be great before the Lord, and wine and strong drink he is not to drink, and he will be filled with Holy Spirit all the way [
\f2\b aqua
\f3\b0  = wholly] from his mother's womb. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  And numerous ones of the sons of Israel he will turn back to the Lord their God, 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  and he will go before him in Elijah's spirit and power, to turn back the hearts of fathers to children and the refusers to the insight of just ones, to put before the Lord a prepared people.\'94\
	
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  And Zechariah said to the angel: \'93How can I know this thing? For I am old, and my wife has [an age of] many years.\'94 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  In answer the angel said to him: \'93I [am] Gabriel, who stands before God, and I was sent forth to speak with you and to make the good news about these things known to you. 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  But behold! you will be silent and will not be able to speak until the day when these things will happen, since you did not believe in my words, which will be made true in their time.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Ar i lie *lartane Secar\'edan, ar anelte elmendasse pan anes ta andave i y\'e1nasse. 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre ett\'fales uas polle carpa t\'e9na, ar t\'fanelte i cennes maur i y\'e1nasse, ar carnes hwermeli tien, en n\'e1la \'fapa. 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  \'cdre i auri *veuyaleryo n\'e1ner telyaine, oantes coaryanna.\
	
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Mal apa auri sine El\'edsavet nostane, ar lanyanes inse exellon ter astari lempe, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  \'93Sie i H\'e9ru ac\'e1rie nin, m\'ed auri yassen cimnes ni mapien oa nucumnienya mici atani.\'94\
	
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  I enquea astaresse i vala Avriel n\'e1ne mentaina Erullo ostonna Alileasse estaina Nasaret, 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  vendenna nauta verien n\'e9r estaina Y\'f3sef, Laviro nosseo, ar i vendeo esse n\'e1ne Mar\'eda. \

\f3\i \

\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  And the people waited for Zechariah, and they were in wonder since he was so long in the sanctuary. 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  But when he came out he could not speak to them, and they perceived that he saw a vision in the sanctuary, and he made gestures to them, still being dumb. 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  When the days of his service were complete, he went away to his house.\
	
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  But after these days Elizabeth conceived, and she secluded herself from others for [
\f2\b ter
\f3\b0  = 'through'] six months, saying: \'93Thus the Lord has done to me, in the days in which he heeded me to take away my humiliation among men.\'94\
	
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city in Galilee called Nazareth, 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  to a maiden engaged to [
\f2\b nauta verien
\f3\b0  = obliged to marry] a man called Joseph, of the kin of David, and the maiden's name was Mary.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre i vala lende minna epe se, quentes: \'93Hara m\'e1riesse, elye ye ac\'e1mie Eruanna; i H\'e9ru aselye.\'94 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Mal M\'e1ria n\'e1ne *tarastaina i queti\'e9nen ar n\'e9ve hanya mana nostale *suili\'e9va ta n\'e1ne. 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Ar i vala quente senna: \'93\'c1va ruce, Mar\'eda, an ih\'edriel lisse as Eru, 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  ar y\'e9! nostuval m\'f3nalyasse ar coluva yondo, ar alye anta sen i esse Y\'e9sus. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  S\'e9 nauva t\'fara ar nauva estaina i Antaro Yondo, ar i H\'e9ru Eru antuva sen Lavir ataryo mahalma, 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  ar turuvas Y\'e1covo nosse tennoio, ar ua euva metta aranieryo.\'94\
	
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Mal Mar\'eda quente i valanna: \'93Manen nat sina martuva, pan uan ista n\'e9r?\'94 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Ar hanquentasse i vala quente senna: \'93Aire Fea tuluva lyenna, ar i Antaro t\'fare teltuva lye; sie yando i aire n\'e1la n\'f3na nauva estaina Eruo Yondo.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 28
\f3\b0  And when the angel went inside before her, he said: \'93Greetings, you who have received grace; the Lord [is] with you. 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  But Mary was troubled by the saying and tried to understand what kind of greeting that was. 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  And the angel said to her: \'93Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God, 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  and behold! you will conceive in your womb and will bear a son, and you are to give him the name Jesus. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High, for the Lord God will give him David his father's throne, 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  and he will rule over Jacob's house [
\f2\b nosse
\f3\b0 : kin] forever, and [there] will not be [any] end of his kingdom.\'94\
	
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  But Mary said to the angel: \'93How will this thing happen, since I do not know a man?\'94 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  And in answer the angel said to her: \'93Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; thus also the holy [one] being born will be called God's Son.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! El\'edsavet, ye n\'e1 nosselyo, inse onostie yondo y\'e1rieryasse, ar astar sina n\'e1 i enquea sen ye n\'e1ne estaina *y\'e1vel\'f3ra. 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  An Erun ea munta \'fac\'e1rima.\'94 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  T\'e1 Mar\'eda quente: \'93Ela i H\'e9ruo *n\'fare! Nai martuva nin ve equ\'e9tiel.\'94 Ar i vala oante sello.\
	
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Mal yane auressen Mar\'eda oronte ar lende hormenen ostonna Y\'fareasse, 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  ar mennes mir coarya Secar\'eda ar *suilane El\'edsavet. 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  \'cdre El\'edsavet hlasse Mar\'edo *suilie, i lapse m\'f3naryasse campe, ar El\'edsavet n\'e1ne qu\'e1tina Aire Feanen, 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  ar y\'e1mes taura \'f3manen ar quente: \'93Aistana elye im\'edca nissi, ar aistana i y\'e1ve m\'f3nalyo! 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  Ar manen n\'e1 i nat sina amartie nin, i Herunyo amil t\'fala ninna? 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  An y\'e9! \'edre *suilielyo lamma t\'fale hlarunyanta, i lapse m\'f3nanyasse campe t\'fara alassenen! 
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  Valima s\'e9 ye s\'e1ve i nauvar c\'e1rine nanwe i nati qu\'e9tine senna lo i H\'e9ru!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 36
\f3\b0  And behold! Elizabeth, who is of your kin, has herself conceived a son in her old age, and this month is the sixth for her who was called unfruitful. 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  For to God [there] is nothing impossible.\'94 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  Then Mary said: \'93Behold the servant-girl of the Lord! May it happen to me as you have said.\'94 And the angel went away from her.\
	
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  But in those days Mary arose and went with urgency to a city in Judea, 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  and she went into the hpise of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth. 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  When Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, the babe in her womb jumped, and Elizabeth was filled with Holy Spirit, 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  and she cried with a great voice and said: \'93Blessed [are] you among women, and blessed [is] the fruit of your womb! 
\f2\b 43
\f3\b0  And how is [it] that this thing has happened to me, that my Lord's mother is coming to me?\'94 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  And behold! when the sound of your greeting came to my ears, the babe in my womb jumped with great joy! 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  Happy [is] she who believed that will be made true the things spoken to her by the Lord!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  T\'e1 Mar\'eda quente: \'93Feanya laita i H\'e9ru, 
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  ar fairenya n\'e1 mi alasse Eru *Rehtonyanen, 
\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  an ec\'e9nies *n\'fareryo naldie. Ar y\'e9! ho s\'ed ilye *n\'f3nari estuvar ni valima, 
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  an i Taura ac\'e1rie t\'fare cardali nin, ar aire n\'e1 esserya; 
\f0\b 50
\f1\b0  ar ter *n\'f3nar\'e9li ar n\'f3nar\'e9li oravierya ea issen melir se. 
\f0\b 51
\f1\b0  Ac\'e1ries taure natali, ivinties i nar turinque endalto sanwessen. 
\f0\b 52
\f1\b0  Hantes undu taurali mahalmallon ar ortane naldali; 
\f0\b 53
\f1\b0  aqu\'e1ties i maitar m\'e1re natal\'ednen ar ementie oa luste i s\'e1mer lar. 
\f0\b 54
\f1\b0  Am\'e1nies Israel n\'faroryan, enyalien oravie,\
\

\f2\i\b 46
\f3\b0  Then Mary said: \'93My soul praises the Lord, 
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  and my spirit is in joy by God my Savior, 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  for he has seen the lowly state of his maidservant. And behold! from now all generations will call me happy, 
\f2\b 49
\f3\b0  for the Mighty One has done great deeds to me, and holy is his name; 
\f2\b 50
\f3\b0  and through generations and generations his mercy is upon [those] that love him. 
\f2\b 51
\f3\b0  He has done mighty things,  he has scattered [those] that are haughty in the thoughts of their hearts. 
\f2\b 52
\f3\b0  He threw down mighty ones from thrones and raised up lowly ones; 
\f2\b 53
\f3\b0  he has filled the hungry ones with good things and has sent away empty [those] that had riches. 
\f2\b 54
\f3\b0  He has helped Israel his servant, to recall mercy,\

\f1\i0 \
 
\f0\b 55
\f1\b0  ve nyarnes atarilvain, Avrah\'e1men ar nosseryan, tennoio.\'94 
\f0\b 56
\f1\b0  Ar Mar\'eda lemyane as El\'edsavet *os astari nelde. T\'e1 nanwennes coaryanna.\
	
\f0\b 57
\f1\b0  Elisav\'e9ten t\'fale i l\'fame colien lapserya, ar colles yondo. 
\f0\b 58
\f1\b0  Ar i armaror ar nosseryo queni hlasser i sen-antane i H\'e9ru t\'fara oravie, ar anelte mi alasse \'f3se. 
\f0\b 59
\f1\b0  Ar i toltea auresse t\'falelte *oscirien i h\'edna, ar estumneltes ataryo essenen, Secar\'eda. 
\f0\b 60
\f1\b0  Mal amillerya hanquente ar eque: \'93V\'e1, mal esserya nauva Yoh\'e1no.\'94 
\f0\b 61
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentelte senna: \'93Ea *\'faquen nosselyasse ye same esse tana.\'94 
\f0\b 62
\f1\b0  T\'e1 cestanelte hanquenta i atarello hwermel\'ednen, mana esse mernes i h\'ednan. 
\f0\b 63
\f1\b0  Ar arcanes *palma ar tence: \'93Esserya n\'e1 Yoh\'e1no.\'94 Ar illi mici te n\'e1ner elmendasse.  \
\

\f2\i\b 55
\f3\b0  as he told to our fathers, to Abraham and to his kin, forever. 
\f2\b 56
\f3\b0  And Mary remained with Elizabeth around three months. Then she returned to her house.\
	
\f0\i0\b 57
\f3\i\b0  For Elizabeth came the time for bearing her baby, and she bore a son. 
\f0\i0\b 58
\f3\i\b0  And the neighbors and the people of her kin heard that the Lord gave her great mercy, and they were in joy with her. 
\f0\i0\b 59
\f3\i\b0  And on the eight day they came to circumcise the child, and they were going to call it by his father's name, Zecharia. 
\f0\i0\b 60
\f3\i\b0  But its mother answered and said: \'93No, but its name shall be John.\'94 
\f0\i0\b 61
\f3\i\b0  Then they said to her: \'93[There] is no one in your family that has that name.\'94 
\f0\i0\b 62
\f3\i\b0  Then they sought an answer from the father by gestures, what name he wanted for the child. 
\f0\i0\b 63
\f3\i\b0  And he requested a tablet and wrote: \'93His name is John.\'94 And all among them were in wonder.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 64 
\f1\b0 M\'ed imya l\'fa antorya n\'e1ne pantaina ar lamberya lehtaina, ar quentes, aistala Eru. 
\f0\b 65
\f1\b0  Ar rucie lantane ilye armaroryannar, ar m\'ed quanda ortom\'e9na Y\'fareasse mo caramper pa ilye nati sine, 
\f0\b 65
\f1\b0  ar illi i hlasser t\'faner sa endaltasse, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c9 mana nauva h\'edna sina?\'94 An yando i H\'e9ruo m\'e1 enge \'f3se.\
	
\f0\b 67
\f1\b0  Ar Secar\'eda atarya n\'e1ne qu\'e1tina Aire Feanen ar quente ve *Eruterc\'e1no, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 68
\f1\b0  \'93Na aistana i H\'e9ru, Isra\'e9lo Aino, pan ic\'edmies ar etelehties lierya! 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Ar ortanes ven rasse rehti\'e9va Lavir n\'faroryo coasse, 
\f0\b 70
\f1\b0  ve equ\'e9ties ter anto i airi terc\'e1noryaron et i vanwiello, 
\f0\b 71
\f1\b0  pa rehtie \'f1ottolvallon ar ho i m\'e1 ion tevir ve, 
\f0\b 72
\f1\b0  tanien oravie atarilvassen ar enyalien aire v\'e9rerya, 
\f0\b 73
\f1\b0  i vanda ya antanes Avraham atarelvan, \
\

\f3\i At the same moment his mouth was opened and his tongue loosened, and he spoke, blessing God. 
\f2\b 65
\f3\b0  And fear fell upon all his neighbors, and in the whole mountain-region in Judea one talked about all these things, 
\f2\b 65
\f3\b0  and all that heard perceived it in their heart, saying: \'93What indeed will this child be?\'94 For also the Lord's hand was with him.\
	
\f2\b 67
\f3\b0  And Zecharia his father was filled with Holy Spirit and spoke as a prophet, saying: 
\f2\b 68
\f3\b0  \'93Blessed be the Lord, God of Israel, since he has heeded and has delivered his people! 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  And he raised for us a horn of salvation in David his servant's house, 
\f2\b 70
\f3\b0  as he has spoken through the mouth of his holy heralds from out of the past, 
\f2\b 71
\f3\b0  about salvation from our enemies and from the hand of [those] that hate us, 
\f2\b 72
\f3\b0  to show mercy on our fathers and to recall his holy covenant, 
\f2\b 73
\f3\b0  the oath that he gave to Abraham our father,\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 74
\f1\b0  lavien ven n\'e1ve n\'faroli sen apa anelve rehtaine ho \'f1ottolvaron m\'e1, 
\f0\b 75
\f1\b0  airesse ar failiesse epe se ilye aurelvassen. 
\f0\b 76
\f1\b0  Mal ty\'e9, h\'edna, nauva estaina Eruterc\'e1no i Antaro, an menuvatye epe i Heru manwien malleryar, 
\f0\b 77
\f1\b0  antien istya rehti\'e9no lieryan apseni\'e9nen \'facareltaiva, 
\f0\b 78
\f1\b0  Ainolvo *ofelmenen oravi\'e9no, yanen anar\'f3re et tarmenello tuluva venna, 
\f0\b 79
\f1\b0  antien alcar in h\'e1mar morniesse ar \'f1uruhuinesse, tulien talulvat i tiesse raineva.\'94\
	
\f0\b 80
\f1\b0  Ar i h\'edna alle ar n\'e1ne carna taura fairesse, ar anes i erumessen tenna i aure yasse tanumnes inse Isra\'e9len.\
\

\f2\i\b 74
\f3\b0  to allow us to be servants for him after we were saved from the hand of our enemies, 
\f2\b 75
\f3\b0  in holiness and justness before him in all our days. 
\f2\b 76 
\f3\b0 But you, child, shall be called prophet of the Most High, for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways, 
\f2\b 77
\f3\b0  to give knowledge of salvation to his people by forgiveness of their sins, 
\f2\b 78
\f3\b0  by our God's compassion of mercy, by which a sunrise out of high will come upon us, 
\f2\b 79
\f3\b0  in order to give glory to [those] that sit in darkness and death-shadow, to lead our feet on the path of peace.\'94\
	
\f2\b 80
\f3\b0  And the child grew and was made mighty in spirit, and he was in the deserts until the day when he was going to show himself to Israel.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 2 \

\f1\b0 Ar t\'fale ente auressen i *etelende canwa Auhusto i Ingaranello, i mo notumne i quanda mar. 
\f0\b 2 
\f1\b0 Minya notie sina martane \'edre Quirinio n\'e1ne c\'e1no S\'edrio. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Ilye queni lender n\'e1ven n\'f3tine, ilquen v\'e9ra ostoryanna. 
\f0\b 4 
\f1\b0 Yando Y\'f3sef lende ama Alileallo, et i ostollo Nasaret, mir Y\'farea, Laviro ostonna, ya n\'e1 estaina Vet-Lehem, pan anes maro ar nosseo Laviro, 
\f0\b 5 
\f1\b0 n\'e1ven n\'f3tina as Mar\'eda ye n\'e1ne antaina sen vestalesse, ar ye s\'ed n\'e1ne *lapsarwa. 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  \'cdre engette tasse, i l\'fame t\'fale yasse columnes lapserya. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Ar colles yondorya, i minn\'f3na, ar se-vaitanes ar panyane se *salquecolcasse, pan ua enge t\'fan n\'f3me m\'ed *sendasse.  \
	
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Enger mavalli i imya n\'f3resse i marner i restasse, t\'edrala l\'e1m\'e1reltar i l\'f3misse. 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Ar i H\'e9ruo vala tarne ara te, ar i H\'e9ruo alcar caltane *os te, ar t\'fara caure nampe te. 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Mal i vala quente t\'e9na: \'94\'c1va ruce, pan inye c\'e1ra sinwa len t\'fara alasse ya nauva i quanda lien, 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  an anaie c\'f3lina len s\'edra *Rehto, ye n\'e1 Hristo, i Heru, Laviro ostosse. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ar si nauva tanwa len: Hiruvalde vinimo, vaitana ar caitala *salquecolcasse.\'94 
\f0\b 13 
\f1\b0 Ar rincanen enge as i vala rimbe i meneldea hosseo, laitala Eru ar qu\'e9tala:  
\f0\b 14 
\f1\b0 \'94Alcar i tarmenissen na Erun, ar cemende raine i atanin pa i sanas mai.\'94\
	
\f0\b 15 
\f1\b0 Ar apa i vali oanter tello mir menel, i mavari quenter qu\'e9n i exenna: \'94Alve lelya Vet-Lehemenna cenien nat sina ya amartie, ya i H\'e9ru ac\'e1rie sinwa ven.\'94  
\f0\b 16 
\f1\b0 Ar lendelte hormenen ar hirner Mar\'eda ar Y\'f3sef ar i vinimo caitala i *salquecolcasse.  
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  \'cdre cennelte se, carnelte sinwe i nati yar n\'e1ner qu\'e9tine t\'e9na pa h\'edna sina. 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ar elmenda nampe ilquen hl\'e1rala pa i nati ny\'e1rine ten lo i mavari, 
\f0\b 19 
\f1\b0 mal Mar\'eda hempe ilye quetier sine ar sanne pa tai endaryasse. 
\f0\b 20 
\f1\b0 T\'e1 i mavari nanwenner, antala alcar ar laitale Erun pa ilqua ya hlasselte ar cennelte, aqua ve ta n\'e1ne ny\'e1rina ten. \
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 2\

\f3\b0 And it happened [lit. \'94came\'94] in those days that a command went forth from Augustus the High King, that one was to count the whole world. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  This first counting occurred while Qurinius was ruler of Syria. 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  All people went in order to be counted, everyone to his own city. 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  Also Joseph went up from Galilee, out of the city [of] Nazareth, into Judea, to David\'92s city, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of David\'92s house and family, 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  in order to be counted [along] with Mary who was given to him in marriage, and who now was pregnant [*
\f2\b lapsarwa
\f3\b0 , having a baby, i.e. inside her] . 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  While they [-
\f2\b tt\'eb
\f3\b0 , dual] were there, the time came when [
\f2\b yasse
\f3\b0  = in which] she was to bear her baby. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  And she bore her son, the firstborn, and swaddled him and put him in a manger [*
\f2\b salquecolca
\f3\b0  = grass-box], since [there] was not [any] room for them [
\f2\b t\'fan
\f3\b0 , dual] at the inn.\
	
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  [There] were some shepherds [
\f2\b mavalli 
\f3\b0  =
\f2\b  mavar-li
\f3\b0 , partitive plural] in that same country that dwelt in the field, watching their flocks in the night. 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  And the Lord\'92s angel stood by them, and the Lord\'92s glory shone about [*
\f2\b os
\f3\b0 ] them, and great fear seized them. 
\f2\b 10 
\f3\b0 But the angel said to them: \'94Do not be afraid, for I am making known to you a great joy that will be for the entire people, 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  for [there] has been born to you today a Saviour, who is Christ, the Lord, in the city of David. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  And this will be for you a sign: You will find an infant, swaddled and lying in a manger.\'94 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  And suddenly [
\f2\b rincanen
\f3\b0  = with a sudden move] [there] was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army, praising God and saying: 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  \'93Glory be in the high places to God, and on earth peace to the men of whom he thinks well.\'94\
	
\f2\b 15 
\f3\b0 And after the angels went away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to the other: \'94Let us go to Bethlehem to see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made known to us.\'94 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  And they went with urgency and found Mary and Joseph and the infant lying in the manger. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  When they saw him, they made known the things that were said to them about this child. 
\f2\b 18 
\f3\b0 And wonder seized everyone hearing about the things told to them by the shepherds, 
\f2\b 19 
\f3\b0 but Mary kept these sayings and thought about them in her heart. 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  Then the shepherds went back, giving glory and praise to God about everything that they heard and saw, wholly as that was [or, had been] told to them.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre i toltea auresse t\'fale, n\'e1veryan *oscirna, camnes i esse Y\'e9sus, yanen i vala estane se n\'f3 anes nostaina i m\'f3nasse.\
	
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  \'cdre i auri poici\'e9va n\'e1ner telyaine M\'f3seo \cf2 \uc0\u350 anyenen, tallettes Yer\'fasalemenna panien se epe i H\'e9ru, 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  ve n\'e1 t\'e9cina i H\'e9ruo \uc0\u350 anyesse: \'93Ilya hanu pantala s\'fama nauva estaina aire i H\'e9run\'94, 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  ar talien *yanca ve n\'e1 qu\'e9tina i H\'e9ruo \uc0\u350 anyesse: \'93*Cucuolle atta hya nessa cucuo atta.\'94\
	
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! enge n\'e9r Yer\'fasalemesse yeo esse n\'e1ne S\'edmeon, ar n\'e9r sina n\'e1ne faila ar r\'facala Erullo, y\'e9tala ompa i tiutalenna Israelwa, ar aire fea caine senna. \
\

\f2\i\b 21
\f3\b0  And when the eighth day came, for him to be circumcised, he received the name Jesus, with which the angel called him before he was conceived in the womb.\
	
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  When the days of purification were completed by the Law of Moses, they [dual] brought him to Jerusalem to place him before [= present him to] the Lord, 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  as is written in the Law of the Lord: \'93Every male opening a womb will be called holy to the Lord\'94, 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  and to bring a sacrifice as is written in the Law of the Lord: \'93Two turtledoves or two young doves.\'94\
	
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  And behold! [there] was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon, and this man was just and fearing God, looking forward to the comfort of Israel, and holy spirit lay upon him. \

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b \cf0 26
\f1\b0  Ente, n\'e1ne sen apantaina i uas cenumne qualme n\'f3 cenie i H\'e9ruo Hristo. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  I Fairenen s\'ed t\'fales i cordanna, ar \'edre i nostaru tallet i h\'edna Y\'e9sus carien sen ya n\'e1ne senwa i \cf2 \uc0\u350 anyenen, 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  S\'edmeon immo camne se mir rancuryat, ar laitanes Eru ar quente: \'93S\'ed, Tur, lavuval m\'f3lelyan auta rainesse ve equ\'e9tiel, 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  an hendunyat ec\'e9niet rehtielya, 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  ya amanwiel epe ilye i lier, 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  cala mapien oa i va\uc0\u351 ar i n\'f3rellon ar alcar Israel lielyan.\'94 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Ar atarya yo amillerya n\'e1net elmendasse pa i nati qu\'e9tine pa se. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Ar S\'edmeon aistane tu, mal quentes Mar\'eda amilleryanna: \'93Y\'e9, si anaie panyaina i lanten ar i ortien rimbalion Israelde, ar tanwa yanna mo quete, \
\

\f2\i\b 36
\f3\b0  Furthermore, it was revealed to him that he was not going to see death before seeing the Christ of the Lord. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  By the Spirit he now came to the temple, and when the parents [dual] brought the child Jesus to do to him what was usual by the Law, 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  Simeon himself received him into his arms, and he praised God and said: \'93Now, Master, you will allow your servant to pass away in peace as you have said, 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  for my eyes have seen your salvation, 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  that you have prepared before all the peoples, 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  a light to take away the veil from the nations and a glory to Israel your people. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  And his father and his mother were [dual] were in wonder about the things said about him. 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  And Simeon blessed them, but he said to Mary his mother: \'93Behold, this one has been placed for the fall and for the rising of numeous ones in Israel, and a sign that one speaks against, \

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  \'96 \'e9 lango menuva ter v\'e9ra fealya \'96 apantien rimbe endaron sanwi.\'94\
	
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Ar enge n\'eds estaina Anna, yelderya Fanuel nosseo Ahyero, ye n\'e1ne *Eruterc\'e1ne. Anes y\'e1ra ar s\'e1me rimbe loali, apa marnes as n\'e9r ter loar otso apa venesserya, 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  ar epeta anes *verul\'f3ra tenna s\'ed s\'e1mes loar canta *toloquean. \'danes oi oa i cordallo, mal *veuyanes Eru auresse yo l\'f3misse, *avam\'e1tala ar y\'e1lala senna. 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Ar yana l\'famesse orontes ar antane Erun hantale, ar carampes pa i h\'edna ilyannar i yenter ompa i ehtelehtienna Yer\'fasalenwa. \
	
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Ar apa telyanette ilqua i H\'e9ruo \uc0\u350 anyenen nanwennette Alileanna ar ostottanna, N\'e1saret. 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Ar i h\'edna alle ar *yestane n\'e1ve polda, n\'e1la qu\'e1tina saili\'e9nen, ar Erulisse caine senna. \
\

\f2\i\b 35 
\f3\b0 indeed a sword will go through your own soul \'96 to reveal the thoughts of numerous hearts.\'94\
	
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  And [there] was a woman called Anna, daughter of Fanuel of the tribe [or kin] of Asher, who was a prophet. She was old and had [an age of] many years, after she dwelt with a man for [
\f2\b ter
\f3\b0 , through] seven years after her virginhood, 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  and thereafter she was widowed until she now had [an age of] eighty-four years. She was not ever away from the temple, but she served God day and night, fasting and calling upon him. 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  And in that hour she arose and gave thanks to God, and she talked about the child to all that looked forward to the deliverance of Jerusalem.\
	
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  And after they [dual \'96 the parents] completed everything by the Law of the Lord they returned to Galilee and their city, Nazareth. 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  And the child grew [or thrived] and started to be strong, being filled with wisdom, and grace rested on him.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Ilya loasse nostaruryat lendet Yer\'fasalemanna, i a\uc0\u351 arenna Lahti\'e9no. 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre s\'e1mes loar yunque, lendelte ama i a\uc0\u351 aro haimenen 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  ar telyaner i auri. Mal \'edre nanwennette, Y\'e9sus i seldo lemyane Yer\'fasalemesse, ar nostaruryat uat t\'fane sa. 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  S\'e1nala i anes im\'edca i queni lelyala uo, lendette er aureo tie; t\'e1 cestanettes mici i queni nossetto ar i queni i sintette. 
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre uatte hirne se, ent\'falette Yer\'fasalemenna, cestala se. 
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  Ar apa auri nelde hirnettes i cordasse, h\'e1mala im\'edca i *peantari, lastala t\'e9na ar maqu\'e9tala t\'e9na. 
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  Mal illi i lastaner senna n\'e1ner captaine handeryanen ar hanquentaryainen. 
\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  S\'ed \'edre cennettes anette elmendasse, ar amillerya quente senna: \'93H\'edna, mana castatya carien ment sie? Y\'e9, ataretya yo inye n\'e1net \'f1walyaine, cestala tye!\'94 
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  Mal quentes t\'fana: \'93Mana castasta cestien ni? Ma uaste sinte i mauya nin n\'e1ve i coasse Atarinyava?\'94 
\f0\b 50
\f1\b0  Mal uatte hanyane i quetie ya quentes t\'fana. \
\

\f2\i\b 41
\f3\b0  Every year his parents [dual] went to Jerusalem, to the festival of Passover. 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  And when he had [an age of] twelve years, they [pl.] went according to [-
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] the habit [or, tradition] of the festival 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  and completed the days. But when they [dual = the parents] returned, Jesus the boy remained in Jerusalem, and his parents did not notice it. 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  Thinking that he was among the people traveling together, they went a distance of one day; then they sought him among the people of their kin and the people that they knew. 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  But when they did not find him, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking him. 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  And after three days they found him in the temple, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them. 
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  But all that listened to him were startled by [-
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] his understanding and by his answers. 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  Now when they [dual = the parents] saw him they were in wonder, and his mother said to him: \'93Child, what is your reason for doing so to us? Behold, your father and I were tormented, seeking you!\'94 
\f2\b 49
\f3\b0  But he said to them: \'93What is your reason for seeking me? Did you not know that it is necessary for me to be in the house of my Father?\'94 
\f2\b 50
\f3\b0  But they did not understand the saying that he said to them.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 51
\f1\b0  Ar lendes undu asette ar t\'fale Nasaretenna, ar cimnes canwattar. Ar amillerya hempe ilye nati sine endaryasse. 
\f0\b 52
\f1\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus lende ompa mi sailie ar alie ar lisse mici Eru ar atani. \
\

\f2\i\b 51
\f3\b0  And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and he heeded their commands. And his mother kept all these things in her heart. 
\f2\b 52
\f3\b0  And Jesus went forward in wisdom and growth and grace among God and men.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 3\

\f1\b0 I *lepenquea loasse yasse Tiv\'e9rio turne ve Ingaran, \'edre Pontio Pil\'e1to n\'e1ne n\'f3rec\'e1no Y\'fareo, ar Herol turne ve *canastatur mi Alilea, ar Filip h\'e1norya turne ve *canastatur m\'ed m\'e9nar Itur\'e9a ar Traconitis, ar Lis\'e1nias n\'e1ne i *canastatur Avil\'e9neo, 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  \'edre Annas ar Caiafas n\'e1ner h\'e9re *airimor, Eruo quetta t\'fale ana Yoh\'e1no Secar\'edo yondo i ravandasse.\
	
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Ar lendes i quanda m\'e9nanna *os Yordan, *nyardala *tumyale inwisti\'e9no ya anta apsenie \'facariva, 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  ve n\'e1 t\'e9cina i parmasse quettaron Yesaia i Eruterc\'e1no: \'93\'d3ma queno ye y\'e1ma i ravandasse: Alde manwa i Heruo malle, cara tieryar t\'e9re! 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ilya y\'e1we nauva qu\'e1tina, ar ilya oron ar ambo nauva c\'e1rina l\'e1ra, ar i l\'favar nauvar c\'e1rine t\'e9re tieli ar i tumpur paste malleli, 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  ar ilya hr\'e1ve cenuva Eruo rehtie.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 3\

\f3\b0 In the fifteenth year in which Tiberius ruled as High King [or, Emperor], when Pontius Pilate was governor [
\f2\b n\'f3rec\'e1no
\f3\b0 : land-commander], and Herod ruled as farthing-ruler in Galilee, and Philip his brother ruled as farthing-ruler in the regions [of] Iturea and Traconitis, and Lysenias was the farthing-ruler of Abilene, 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  while Annas and Caiaphas were chief priests, God's word came to John, Zechariah's son, in the wilderness.\
	
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  And he went to the entire region around Jordan, preaching baptism of repentance which gives forgivenes of sins, 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  as is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the Prophet: 
\f1\i0 \'94
\f3\i A voice that is crying in the wilderness: You prepare the Lord's way, make his paths straight! 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  Every gully will be filled, and every mountain and hill will be made flat, and the bends will be made straight paths and the humps smooth roads, 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  and all flesh will see God's salvation.
\f1\i0 \'94\
\
	
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Etta quentes i \uc0\u351 angannar ett\'falala n\'e1ven *tumyaine lo s\'e9: \'93A h\'ednar leucoron, man any\'e1rie len manen u\u351 e i t\'falala r\'fa\u351 ello? 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Etta cara y\'e1vi valde inwisto. Ar \'e1va *yesta quete indenna: 'Ve atar samilve Avraham.' An quetin lenna i Eru pole orta h\'edni Avrah\'e1men sine sarnollon. 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  \'c9 i pelecco yando s\'ed caita ara i aldaron \uc0\u351 undo; etta ilya alda ye ua care m\'e1ra y\'e1ve nauva c\'edrina undu ar h\'e1tina mir i n\'e1re.\'94\
	
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Ar i \uc0\u351 angar maquenter senna: \'93T\'e1 mana caruvalme?\'94 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mauya i neren ye same laupe atta, anta er i quenen ye ua same, ar mauya yen same natali matien care i imya.\'94 \
\

\f2\i\b 	7
\f3\b0  Therefore he said to the crowds coming to be baptized by him: \'94Children of serpents, who has told you how to escape from the coming wrath? 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  Therefore produce fruits worthy of repentance. And do not begin to say to yourselves: 'As father we have Abraham.' For I say to you that God can rise [up] children to Abraham from these stones. 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  Indeed the axe even now lies by the root of the trees; therefore every tree that does not make good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.\'94 \
	
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  And the crowds asked him: \'94Then what are we to do?\'94 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  In answer he said to them: \'93It is necessary for the man who has two tunics, to give one to the person that does not have, and it is necessary for [him] who has things to eat to do the same.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Mal yando *tungwem\'f3li t\'faler n\'e1ven tumyaine, ar quentelte senna: \'93*Peantar, mana caruvalme?\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'94\'c1va cane telpe han i vanima nonwe.\'94 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Ente, i m\'f3ler m\'ed hosse maquenter senna: \'93Mana elme caruvar?\'94 Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93\'c1va *tarasta aiquen, ar \'e1va quete huruvi pa ongwi yar queni uar ac\'e1rier, mal lava *paityalelda farya len.\'94\
	
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  S\'ed i quanda lie yente ompa yanna martumne, ar illi sanner endaltasse pa Yoh\'e1no: \'94C\'e9 s\'e9 i Hristo n\'e1?\'94 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Yoh\'e1no hanquente illin: \'93Inye *tumya le nennen;  mal t\'fala ye n\'e1 polda l\'e1 ni; inye ua valda lehtien hyaparyato latta. Le-*tumyuvas Aire Feanen ar n\'e1renen. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  *Saltamarya ea m\'e1ryasse poitien *vattarestarya, ar comyuvas orirya mir i haura, mal i *ospor urtuvas n\'e1renen ya *\'faquen pole *luhtya.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 12
\f3\b0  But also tax collectors came to be baptized, and they said to him: \'93Teacher, what are we to do?\'94 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93Do not demand money beyond the proper sum.\'94 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  Furthermore, [those] who worked in the army asked him: \'93What are \ul we\ulnone  to do?\'94 And he said to them: \'93Do not harass anyone, and do not speak lies about crimes that people have not committed, but let your payment suffice for you.\'94\
	
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  Now the entire people looked forward to what would happen, and all thought in their heart about John: \'93Perhaps he is the Christ?\'94 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  John answered them: \'93I baptize you with water; but [there] comes [the one] who is stronger than I; I am not worthy to loose the strap of his shoes [dual]. He will baptize you with Holy Spirit and with fire. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  His winnowing fork is in his hand to cleanse his threshing floor, and he will gather his grain into the store, but the chaff he will burn with a fire that no one can extinguish.\'94\

\f1\i0 \cf0 \

\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Etta antanes yando rimbe hyane horti\'e9li ar *nyardane i evandilyon i lien. 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Mal Herol i *canastantur, \'edre anes *naityaina lo se pa Her\'f3lias h\'e1noryo veri ar pa ilye i olce cardar yar Herol carne, 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  napanne yando nat sina ilye tane cardain: panyanes Yoh\'e1no mandosse. \
	
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  S\'ed \'edre i quanda lie n\'e1ne *tumyaina, yando Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne *tumyaina, ar \'edre hyamnes, menel n\'e1ne pantaina 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  ar i Aire Fea, *hroacantasse cucuo, t\'fale undu senna, ar \'f3ma t\'fale et menello: \'93Elye n\'e1 yondonya, i melda; pa ly\'e9 as\'e1nien mai.\'94 \
\

\f2\i\b 18
\f3\b0  Therefore he gave also many other urgings and preached the gospel to the people. 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  But Herod the farthing-ruler, when he was rebuked by him concerning Herodias his brother's wife and concerning the wicked deeds that Herod did, 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  added also this thing to all those deeds: he put John in prison.\
	
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  Now when the whole people was baptized, also Jesus was baptized, and as he prayed, heaven was opened 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  and the Holy Spirit, in body-shape of a dove, came down upon him, and a voice came out of heaven: \'93You are my son, the beloved; of you I have thought well.\'94\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus immo, molieryo yestasse, s\'e1me *os loar *nelequean. Anes, mo intyane, yondorya Y\'f3sef, yondorya Heli, 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  yondorya Mattat, yondorya Levi, yondorya Melci, yondorya Yannai, yondorya Y\'f3sef, 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  yondorya Mattat\'edas, yondorya \'c1mos, yondorya Nahum, yondorya Esli, yondorya Nangai, 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  yondorya Maat, yondorya Mattat\'edas, yondorya Semein, yondorya Y\'f3sec, yondorya Y\'f3ra, \
\

\f2\i\b 22
\f3\b0  And Jesus himself, at the beginning of his labor, had [an age of] around thirty years. He was, one supposed, son of Joseph, son of Heli, 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  son of Matthat, son of Levi, son of Melchi, son of Jannai, son of Joseph, 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  son of Mattathias, son of Amos, son of Nahum, son of Esli, son of Naggai, 
\f2\b 26 
\f3\b0 son of Maath, son of Mattathias, son of Semein, son of Josech, son of Joda, \

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  yondorya Yoanan, yondorya Resa, yondorya Seruv\'e1vel, yondorya Hyealtiel, yondorya Neri, 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  yondorya Melci, yondorya Atti, yondorya Cosam, yondorya Elm\'e1ram, yondorya \'c9r, 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  yondorya Y\'e9sus, yondorya Eli\'e9ser, yondorya Y\'f3rim, yondorya Mattat, yondorya Levi, 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  yondorya S\'edmeon, yondorya Y\'faras, yondorya Y\'f3sef, yondorya Y\'f3nam, yondorya Elyacim, 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  yondorya Melea, yondorya Menna, yondorya Mattata, yondorya N\'e1tan, yondorya Lavir, 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  yondorya Yesse, yondorya Over, yondorya Voas, yondorya Salmon, yondorya Naxon, 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  yondorya Amminarav, yondorya Arni, yondorya Hesron, yondorya Peres, yondorya Yeh\'fara, 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  yondorya Y\'e1cov, yondorya \'cdsac, yondorya Avraham, yondorya Tera, yondorya Nahor, 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  yondorya Seru, yondorya Reu, yondorya Pele, yondorya Ever, yondorya Hyela, 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  yondorya Cainan, yondorya Arpaxar, yondorya Hyem, yondorya Noa, yondorya Lamec, 
\f0\b 37 
\f1\b0 yondorya Met\'fasela, yondorya Enoc, yondorya Yarel, yondorya Mahalale\'e9l, yondorya Cainan, 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  yondorya Enos, yondorya Set, yondorya Atan, Eruo yondo.\
\

\f2\i\b 27
\f3\b0  son of Joanan, son of Rhesa, son of Zerubbabel, son of Shealtiel, son of Neri, 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  son of Melchi, son of Addi, son of Cosam, son of Elmadam, son of Er, 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  son of Jesus, son of Eliezer, son of Jorim, son of Matthat, son of Levi, 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  son of Symeon, son of Judas, son of Josef, son of Jonam, son of Eliakim, 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  son of Melea, son of Menna, son of Mattatha, son of Nathan, son of David, 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  son of Jesse, son of Odeb, son of Boaz, son of Salmon, son of Nahshon, 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  son of Amminadab, son of Arni, son of Hezron, 
\f2\b 34 
\f3\b0 son of Jacob, son of Isaac, son of Abraham, son of Terah, son of Nahor, 
\f2\b 35 
\f3\b0 son of Serug, son of Reu, son of Peleg, son of Eber, son of Shelah, 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  son of Cainan, son of Arpachshad, son of Shem, son of Noah, son of Lamech, 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  son of Methuselah, so of Enoch, son of Jared, son of Mahallaleel, son of Cainan, 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  son of Enosh, son of Set, son of Adam, God's son.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 4\

\f1\b0 Ar Y\'e9sus, quanta Aire Feo, lende oa Yordanello ar n\'e1ne tulyaina lo i Faire mir i erume 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  aurin *canaquean, n\'e1la \uc0\u351 ahtaina lo i Arauco. Ar mantes munta yane auressen, ar \'edre anelte vanwe, anes maita. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  T\'e1 i Arauco quente senna: \'93Qui nalye Eruo yondo, queta sar sinanna: Na vistaina mir massa!\'94 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus hanquente senna: \'93N\'e1 t\'e9cina: Atan ua samuva coire massanen erinqua.\'94\
	
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  T\'e1 se-tulyanes ama ar tanne sen ilye aranier ambaro m\'ed erya l\'fa, 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  ar i Arauco quente senna: \'93Antuvan lyen ilya t\'fare sina ar alcarelta, an anaies antaina nin, ar antuvanyes aiquenen ye merin. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Etta, qui elye *tyere n\'ed, ilqua nauva *lyenya.\'94 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93N\'e1 t\'e9cina: I H\'e9ru Ainolya alye *tyere, ar sen erinqua alye *veuya.\'94\
\

\f3\i And Jesus, full of Holy Sprit, went away from Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the desert 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  for forty days, being tempted by the Devil. And he ate nothing in those days, and when they were gone, he was hungry. 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  Then the Devil said to him: \'93If you are God's son, say to this stone: Be changed into bread!\'94 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  But Jesus answered him: \'93[It] is written: Man shall not have life by bread alone.\'94 \
	
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  Then he led him up and showed him all the kingdoms of [the] world in a single moment, 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  and the Devil said to him: \'93I shall give you all this power and their glory, for it has been given to me, and I will give it to anyone that I wish. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  Therefore, if you worship me, everything shall be yours.\'94 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said to him: \'93[It] is written: The Lord your God you are to worship, and for him alone you are to serve.\'94\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  S\'ed se-tulyanes mir Y\'e9rusalem ar panyane i cordo r\'e1masse ar quente senna: \'93Qui nalye Eruo yondo, hata imle undu silo, an n\'e1 t\'e9cina: Canuvas valaryain pa lye, hepien lye, 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  ar: Coluvalte lye m\'e1ltatse, pustien lye petiello talelya sarnenna.\'94 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93N\'e1 qu\'e9tina: \'c1valye tyasta i H\'e9ru Ainolya.\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  T\'e1 i Arauco, apa telie i quanda \'fa\uc0\u351 ahtie, lende oa sello tenna hyana l\'fame.\
	
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  S\'ed Y\'e9sus nanwenne i Faireo t\'faresse mir Alilea. Ar m\'e1ra quetie pa s\'e9 vintane ter i quanda *oscaitala norie. 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Ar peantanes *yomencoaltassen, c\'e1mala laitale ho illi.\
	
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ar t\'fales Nasaretenna, yasse anes ortaina, ar ve haimerya n\'e1ne, lendes mir i *yomencoa, ar orontes hentien.\
\

\f2\i\b 	9
\f3\b0  Now he led him into Jerusalem and put him on the wing of the temple and said to him: \'93If you are God's son, throw yourself down from here, for [it] is written: He will command his angels concerning you, to keep you, 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  and: They will carry you on their hands, to stop you from striking your foot against [any] stone.\'94 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said to him: \'93It is said: Do not test the Lord your God.\'94 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  Then the Devil, after completing the entire temptation, went away from him until another time.\
	
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  Now Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee. And good talk about him spread throughout the entire around-lying country. 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  And he taught in their synagogues, receiving praise from all.\
	
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  And he came to Nazareth, where he was raised, and as his habit was, he went into the synagogue, and he arose to read.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  T\'e1 Isaia i *Eruterc\'e1no *toluparma n\'e1ne antaina sen, ar pantanes i parma ar hirne i n\'f3me yasse n\'e1ne t\'e9cina: 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  \'93I H\'e9ruo faire ea nisse, an *l\'edves ni antien m\'e1re sinyali penyain; ni-mentanes carien sinwa quenin mandosse i nauvalte leryaine ar *c\'e9nel\'f3rain i camuvalte *c\'e9ne, mentien i r\'e1cinar oa lehti\'e9nen, 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  carien sinwa i H\'e9ruo loa m\'e1ra nirmeo.\'94 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ar tolunes i parma, sa- *nanantane i n\'faron ar hamne undu; ar hendu illion i enger i *yomencoasse n\'e1net panyaine sesse. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  T\'e1 *yestanes quete t\'e9na: \'93S\'edra tehtele sina anaie carna nanwa \'edre hlasseldes.\'94 \
	
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Ar illi *vettaner pa se, ar enger elmendasse pa i raine quettar yar t\'faler et antoryallo, ar quentelte: \'93Ma n\'e9r sina ua Y\'f3sefo yondo?\'94 \
\

\f2\i\b 17
\f3\b0  Then the scroll [
\f2\b tolu-parma
\f3\b0  'roll-book'] of Isaiah the Prophet was given to him, and he opened the book and found the place where [it] was written: 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  \'93The spirit of the Lord is on me, for he annointed me to give good news to poor ones; he sent me to make known to people in prison that they will be freed and to blind ones that they will receive sight, to send the broken ones away by a release, 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  to make known the Lord's year of good will.\'94 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  And he rolled up the book, gave it back to the servant and sat down; and the eyes of all that were in the synagogue were fixed on him. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  Then he began to say to them: \'93Today this scripture has been made true while you heard it.\'94\
	
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  And all witenssed about him, and they were in wonder about the gracious words that came out of his mouth, and they said: \'93Is this man not Joseph's son?\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93\'c9 merilde quete ninna &quenna sina: '*Nestando, \'e1 nesta imle! I nati yar ahl\'e1rielme martaner Capernaumesse, cara tai yando sisse v\'e9ra m\'e9nalyasse!\'94 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Mal eques: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lenna i ua ea *Eruterc\'e1no ye n\'e1 mai c\'e1mina v\'e9ra m\'e9naryasse. 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  An mi nanwie quetin lenna: Enger rimbe *verul\'f3rali Israelde El\'edo auressen, \'edre menel n\'e1ne holtaina ter loar nelde ar astari enque, ty\'e1rala t\'fara saicele lanta i n\'f3renna; 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  ananta El\'eda \'fane mentaina aiquenna mici t\'e9, mal Sarefatenna mi S\'edrono n\'f3re, *verul\'f3ra nissenna tasse. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Ente, enger rimbe helmahlaiwali Israelde El\'edhya i Eruterc\'e1no l\'famesse, ananta *\'faquen mici t\'e9 n\'e1ne poitaina, mal N\'e1man Siriallo.\'94 
\f0\b 28 
\f1\b0 Ar illi i hlasser nati sine i *yomencoasse n\'e1ner qu\'e1tine ahanen, 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  ar orontelte ar se-hortaner i osto ettenna, ar tulyaneltes lancanna i oronto yasse ostolta n\'e1ne carastaina, hatien se undu talo. 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Mal s\'e9 menne ter endelta ar lende oa.\
\

\f2\i\b 23
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93Indeed you want to say to me this proverb: Healer, heal yourself! The things that we have heard happened in Capernaum, do them also here in your own region!\'94 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  But he said: \'93Truly I say to you that there is not [any] prophet that is well received in his own region. 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  For in truth I say to you: There were numerous widows in Israel in the days of Eliah, when heaven was shut for [
\f2\b ter
\f3\b0 , \'93through\'94] three years and six months, causing a great famine to fall upon the land; 
\f2\b 26 
\f3\b0 and yet Eliah was not sent to anyone among them, but to Zarephath in the land of Sidon, to a widowed woman there. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  Furthermore, [there] were numerous skin-diseased ones in Israel at the time of Elisha the prophet, and yet no one among them was cleansed, but Naaman from Syria.\'94 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  And all that heard these things in the synagogue were filled with rage, 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  and they arose and hurried him to the outside of the city, and their led him to the brow of the mountain on which their city was built, to throw him down from there. 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  But he walked through their midst and went away. \

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Ar lendes undu Caparnaumenna, osto Alileasse. Ar peantanes tien i *sendaresse, 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  ar anelte qu\'e1tine elmendo i l\'e9nen ya peantanes, an quetierya s\'e1me t\'fare. 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Ar enge i *yomencoasse n\'e9r  haryaina lo faire, \'fapoica rauco, ar y\'e1mes taura \'f3manen: 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  \'93Ai! Mana men ar lyen, Y\'e9sus Nasaretello? Ma ut\'faliel nancarien me? Istan man nalye, Eruo Aire!\'94 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus naityane se, qu\'e9tala: \'93Na quilda ar tula et sello!\'94 Ar apa hatie i n\'e9r undu endeltasse, i rauco t\'fale et sello, \'fa mali\'e9no se. 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  T\'e1 elmenda lantane illinnar, ar carampelte qu\'e9n as i exe, qu\'e9tala: \'93Mana nostale queti\'e9no n\'e1 si? An t\'farenen ar melehtenen canis i \'fapoice fairi, ar ettulilte!\'94 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Ar i sinyar pa se *etelender mir ilya n\'f3me i *oscaitala noriesse.\
	
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Apa autie i *yomencoallo lendes mir coarya S\'edmon. Mal S\'edmondo verio amil n\'e1ne *tarastaina t\'fara \'farenen, ar carnelte arcande sen pa s\'e9. \
\

\f2\i\b 31
\f3\b0  And he went down to Capernaum, a city in Galilee. And he taught them on the day of rest, 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  and they were filled with wonder by the manner that he taught, for his speech had power. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  And [there] was in the synagoge a man possessed by a spirit, an unclean demon, and it cried with a mighty voice: 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  \'93Ah! What [is] there to us and to you [= what do you have to do with our matters], Jesus from Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are, the Holy One of God!\'94 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  And Jesus rebuked it, saying: \'93Be silent and come out of him!\'94 And after throwing the man down in their midst, the demon  came out of him, without hurting him. 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  Then wonder fell upon all, and they talked one with the other, saying: \'93What kind of speech is this? For with power and with might he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!\'94 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  And the news about him went out in every place in the around-lying country.\
	
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  After leaving the synagoge he went into the house of Simon. But Simon's wife's mother was troubled by a great fever [
\f2\b \'fare
\f3\b0 , 'heat'], and they made petition to him about her.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Ar tarnes or i n\'eds ar naityane i \'fare, ar ta oante sello. M\'ed imya l\'fa orontes ar *veuyane tien.\
	
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Mal Anaro n\'fatiesse, illi i s\'e1mer queni hlaiwe *alav\'e9le hl\'edvel\'ednen taller te senna. Pani\'e9nen m\'e1ryat tesse nestanes te. 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Ente, raucoli ett\'faler rimbalillon, y\'e1mala ar qu\'e9tala: \'93Elye n\'e1 Eruo yondo.\'94 Mal naityanes te ar ua l\'e1ve tien quete, pan sintelte i anes i Hristo.\
	
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Ono \'edre aure t\'fale, *etelendes ar menne eressea n\'f3menna. Mal i \uc0\u351 angar cestaner se, ar t\'falelte yanna anes, ar n\'e9velte pusta se autiello tello. 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  Mal quentes t\'e9na: \'93Yando i hyane ostoin mauya nin care sinwa i evandilyon, an ta n\'e1 i casta yanen anen *etementaina.\'94 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  Ar lendes *nyardala Y\'fareo *yomencoassen.\
\

\f2\i\b 39
\f3\b0  And he stood above the woman and rebuked the fever, and that went away from her. In the same moment she arose and served for them. \
	
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  But at the setting of the sun, all that had people sick with various illnesses brought them to him. By putting his hands on them he healed them. 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  Furthermore, demons came out from numerous ones, crying and saying: \'93You are God's son.\'94 But he rebuked them and did not allow them to speak, since they knew that he was the Christ.\
	
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  But when day came, he went out and went to a lonely place. But the crowds sought him, and they came to where he was, and they tried to stop him from going away from them. 
\f2\b 43
\f3\b0  But he said to them: \'93Also to the other cities it is necessary for me to make known the gospel, for that is the reason why [
\f2\b yanen
\f3\b0  = by which] I was sent forth.\'94 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  And he went preaching in the synagogues of Judea.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 5 \

\f1\b0 Mi l\'fa yasse i \uc0\u351 anga ninde senna, lastala Eruo quettanna, tarnes ara i ailin Ennesaret. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Ar cennes lunte atta caitala ara i ailin, mal i *lingwimor n\'e1ner m\'e9nienwe et tullo ar n\'e1ner s\'f3vala rembeltar. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Lelyala mir er i luntion, ya n\'e1ne S\'edmonwa, arcanes sello lelya \uc0\u351 inta tie i norello. T\'e1 hamnes undu, ar i luntello peantanes i \u351 angain.\
	\'cdre pustanes quete, quentes S\'edmonna: \'93\'c1 lelya yanna n\'fara n\'e1, ar alde panya undu rembeldar mapien.\'94 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Mal hanquentasse S\'edmon quente: \'93*Peantar, ter i quanda l\'f3me om\'f3tielme ar namper munta, mal canwalyanen panyuvan i rembeltar undu.\'94\
	
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  \'cdre carnelte sie, y\'f3relte hoa rimbe lingwil\'edva, ar rembeltar n\'e1ner narcaine. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Ar hwernelte *rantarwaltain i hyana luntesse tulieltan manien tien, ar t\'falelte, ar quantelte y\'fayo lunte, tenna anette n\'fatala. \
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 5\

\f3\b0 At an occasion when the crowd pressed against him, listening to God's word, he stood by the lake [of] Gennesaret. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  And he saw two boats lying [on the shore] by the lake, but the fishermen had gone out of them [dual] and were washing their nets. 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  Going into one of the boats, which was Simon's, he asked him to go a short distance [
\f2\b tie 
\f3\b0 = path, direction] from the land. Then he sat down, and from the boat he taught the crowds.\
	When he ceased to speak, he said to Simon: \'93Go to where it is deep, and you [pl.] put down your nets for a catch.\'94 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  But in answer Simon said: \'93Teacher, throughout the entire night we have toiled and caught nothing, but at [-
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] your order I will put the nets down.\'94\
	
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  When they did so, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, and their nets were torn. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  And they gestured to their partners in the other boat for them to come to help them, and they came, and they filled both boats, until they [dual] were going down.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  \'cdre cennes ta, S\'edmon P\'e9ter lantane undu epe Y\'e9suo occat, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1 auta nillo, an nanye *\'facarunqua n\'e9r, Heru!\'94 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  An i mapi\'e9nen lingwil\'edva anes p\'e9tina elmendanen, s\'e9 ar illi i n\'e1ner \'f3se, 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  ar yando y\'fayo Y\'e1cov yo Yoh\'e1no, yondoryar Severai, i n\'e1net *rantarwali as S\'edmon. Mal Y\'e9sus quente S\'edmonna: \'93\'c1va ruce! Ho s\'ed mapuval atalli coirie.\'94 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Ar tulunelte i lunti norenna ar hehtaner ilqua ar hilyaner s\'e9. \
	
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre anes mi er i ostoron, y\'e9! n\'e9r quanta helmahl\'edveo. \'cdre cennes Y\'e9sus lantanes cendeleryanna ar inque sello, qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, qui meril, polil poita ni!\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Ar *eterahtala m\'e1ryanen Y\'e9sus se-appane, qu\'e9tala: \'93Merin! Na poitaina!\'94 Ar m\'ed imya l\'fa i helmahl\'edve v\'e1ne sello. 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Ar cannes i neren: \'93Nyara *uquenen, mal \'e1 auta ar tana imle i *airimon, ar ve M\'f3ses canne cara *yanca poitielyan, ve *vettie tien.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 8
\f3\b0  When he saw that, Simon Peter fell down before Jesus' knees, saying: \'93Go away from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord!\'94 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  For by the catch of fishes he was struck with wonder, he and all that were with him, 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  and also both Jacob and John, the sons of Zebedee, that were partners with Simon. But Jesus said to Simon: \'93Do not be afraid! From now you will catch men alive.\'94 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  And they brought the boats to land and abandoned everything and followed him.\
	
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  And when he was in one of the cities, behold! a man full of skin-disease. When he saw Jesus he fell upon his face and begged of him, saying: \'93Lord, if you want to, you can cleanse me!\'94 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  And reaching out with his hand Jesus touched him, saying: \'93I want to! Be cleansed!\'94 And in the same moment the skin-disease disappeared from him. 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  And he commanded the man: \'93Tell nobody, but go away and show yourself to the priest, and as Moses commended made a sacrifice for your cleansing, as a witness to them.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Mal i quetta pa se vintane ta ita ambe, ar hoe \uc0\u351 angali t\'faler uo lastien ar n\'e1ven nestaine hl\'edveltallon. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ono lendes oa mir i erumi, hy\'e1mala.\
	
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Martane mi aure i anes peantala, ar Farisali ar *peantalli i \uc0\u350 anyeo i n\'e1ner t\'falienwe et ilya mastollo Alileo ar Y\'fareo ar Yer\'fasal\'e9mo hamner tasse, ar i H\'e9ruo t\'fare n\'e1ne tasse, polieryan nesta. 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! quelli c\'f3lala caimasse n\'e9r ye n\'e1ne *\'fal\'e9vima, ar cestanelte tala se ompa ar panya se epe Y\'e9sus. 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre ualte hirne manen pollelte cole se ompa, castanen i \uc0\u351 ango, rentelte i t\'f3panna, ar ter i tupse panyaneltes undu as i caima, i endesse epe Y\'e9sus. 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre cennes savielta quentes: \'93Atan, \'facarelyar nar aps\'e9nine lyen!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 15
\f3\b0  But the word about him scattered that much more, and great crowds came together to listen and to be healed from their sicknesses. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  But he went away into the deserts, praying.\
	
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  It happened in a day that he was teaching, and some Pharisees and teachers of the Law that had come from every village of Galilee and of Judea and of Jerusalem sat there, and the Lord's power was there, for him to be able to heal. 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  And behold! some people bearing on a bed a man that was lame, and they sought to bring him forward and put him before Jesus. 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  But when they did not find how they could carry him forward, by reason of the crowd, they climbed to the roof, and through the thatch they let him down with the bed, in the middle before Jesus. 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  And when he saw their faith he said: \'93Man, your sins are forgiven you!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Ar i parmangolmor ar i Farisar *yestaner sana, qu\'e9tala: \'93Man n\'e1 n\'e9r sina ye qu\'e9ta naiqueti\'e9li? Man lerta apsene \'facari hequa Eru erinqua?\'94 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus, tuntala sanweltar, quenter hanquentasse t\'e9na: \'93Pa mana s\'e1nealde endaldassen? 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Mana i ambe *ascare: quetie '\'dacarelyar nar aps\'e9nine lyen' hya quetie: '\'c1 orta, mapa caimalya ar mena coalyanna.' 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Mal istieldan i same i Atanyondo t\'fare cemende apsenien \'facari \'96\'94 quentes i *\'fal\'e9vima nerenna: \'93Quetin lyenna, \'e1 orta ar mapa ama caimalya ar mena coalyanna.\'94 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Ar mi imya l\'fa orontes epe te, nampe ama ta yasse y\'e1 caines, ar lende coaryanna antala alcar Erun. 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  T\'e1 illi mici te n\'e1ner ara inte, ar antanelte alcar Erun ar n\'e1ner qu\'e1tine caureo, qu\'e9tala: \'93Ec\'e9nielve elmendali s\'edra!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 21
\f3\b0  And the scribes an the Pharisees started to think, saying: \'93Who is this man that is speaking blasphemies? Who may forgive sins except God alone?\'94 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, said in answer to them: \'93About what are you thinking in your hearts? 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  What is the [thing] more easily done, saying 'Your sins are forgiven to you' or saying: \'93Rise, take your bed and go to your house.' 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  But for you to know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins\'94 \'96 he said to the lame man: \'93I say to you, rise and take up your bed and go to your house.\'94 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  And in the same moment he arose before them, took up that on which he lay, and went to his house giving glory to God. 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  Then all among them were beside themselves, and they gave glory to God and were filled with fear, saying: \'93We have seen wonders today!\'94\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Ar apa nati sine *etelendes ar cenne *tungwemo estaina L\'e9vi h\'e1mala m\'ed *tungwemen, ar quentes senna: \'93\'c1ni hilya.\'94 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Ar hehtala ilqua orontes and hilyane se. 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Ente, L\'e9vi carne t\'fara merende sen coaryasse, ar enge hoa \uc0\u351 anga, *tungwem\'f3li ar exeli, i n\'e1ner aselte ara i sarno. 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Ar i Farisar ar parmangolmoltar nurruner hildoryannar, qu\'e9tala: \'93Manen n\'e1 i matilde ar sucilde as *tungwem\'f3li ar \'facarindoli?\'94 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93I samir m\'e1le uar same maure *nestondova, mal i nar engwe. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Ut\'falien yale, l\'e1 failar, mal *\'facarindor inwistenna.\'94\
	
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Quentelte senna: \'93Hildoryar Yoh\'e1no rimbave *avamatir ar carir arcandeli, mal *lyenyar matir ar sucir.\'94 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Lau polilde mauya i endero meldoin *avamate \'edre i ender ea aselte? Ananta aureli tuluvar yassen i ender nauva mapaina oa tello; t\'e1 *avamatuvalte, ente auressen.\'94\
\
	
\f2\i\b 27
\f3\b0  And after these things he went forth and saw a tax-collector called Levi sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: \'93Follow me.\'94 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  And abandoning everything he arose and followed him. 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  Furthermore, Levi made a great feast for him at his house, and [there] was a great crowd, tax collectors and others, that were with them at the table. 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  And the Pharisees and their scribes grumbled against his disciples, saying: \'93How is [it] that you eat and you drink with tax collectors and sinners?\'94 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said to them: \'93[Those] that have health do not have need of a healer, but [those] that are sickly. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  I have come to call, not just ones, but sinners to repentence.\'94\
	
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  They said to him: \'93John's discipels frequently fast and make supplications, but your ones eat and drink.\'94 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  Jesus said to them: \'93Surely you cannot compel the bridegroom's friends to fast when the bridegroom is with them? And yet days shall come in which the bridegroom will be taken away from them; then they shall fast, in those days.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Ente, quentes t\'e9na sestie: \'93*\'daquen cire lanneranta ho vinya colla ar neme sa y\'e1ra collasse, mal qui mo \'e9 care sie, t\'e1 i vinya lanneranta narca oa; ente, i lanneranta ho i vinya colla ua v\'e1vea i y\'e1ran. 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Ar *\'faquen panya vinya limpe y\'e1re *helmolpessen, mal qui mo \'e9 care sie, t\'e1 i vinya limpe *ruve i *helmolpi, ar ulyas ettenna ar i *helmolpi nar nancarne. 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Mal mauya panya vinya limpe vinye *helmolpessen! 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  *\'daquen ye us\'facie y\'e1ra limpe mere vinya, an quetis: 'I y\'e1ra n\'e1 m\'e1ra.'\'94\

\f3\i \
	
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  Furthermore, he spoke this comparison: \'93No one cuts a cloth-piece from a new cloak and sews it in an old cloak, but if one indeed does so, then the new cloth-piece tears away; furthermore, the cloth-piece from the new cloak is not similar to [= does not match] the old. 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  And no one puts new wine in old skin-bottles, but if one indeed does so, then the new wine bursts the skin-bottles, and it flows out and the skin-bottles are destroyed. 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  But it is necessary to put new wine in new skin-bottles! 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  No one who has drunk old wine wants new, for he says: 'The old is good.'\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 6\

\f1\b0 T\'fale *sendaresse i lendes ter orirestali, ar hilmoryar leptaner ar manter i cari oriva, asc\'e1tala tai m\'e1ltatse. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Mal quelli i Farisaron quenter: \'93Manen n\'e1 i c\'e1ralde ya ua l\'e1vina i *sendaresse?\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus hanquente t\'e9na: \'93Ma ualde oi ehentie pa ya Lavir carne \'edre s\'e9 ar i neri \'f3se n\'e1ner maite? 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Lendes mir i coa Eruva ar camne i mastar tani\'e9va ar mante ar antane tai i nerin \'f3se, \'f3mu tai uar l\'e1vina matso aiquenen hequa i *airimoin erinque.\'94 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93I Atanyondo n\'e1 Heru i *sendareo.\'94\
	
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  T\'fale hyana *sendaresse i lendes mir i *yomencoa ar peantane. Ar enge tasse n\'e9r yeo forma n\'e1ne hessa. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  I parmangolmor ar i Farisar tirner se, cenien qui nestumne aiquen i *sendaresse, hirieltan l\'e9 yanen pollelte *ulquete se. 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Mal sintes manen sannelte, ananta quentes i nerenna arwa i hessa m\'e1o: \'93\'c1 orta ar tara i endesse.\'94 Ar orontes ar tarne tasse. 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Maquetin lello: Ma n\'e1 l\'e1vina i *sendaresse care m\'e1rie hya care ulco, rehta qu\'e9n hya nancare se?\'94\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 6\

\f3\b0 It happened [lit. came] on a day of restthat he went through some grain-fields [
\f2\b ori-resta-li
\f3\b0 ], and his disciples picked and ate the heads of grain, crushing them in their hand. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  But some of the Pharisees said: \'93How is [it] that you are doing what is not allowed on the day of rest?\'94 \
	
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  But Jesus answered them: \'93Have you not ever read about that which David did when he and the men with him were hungry? 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  He went into God's house and received the breads of presentation [
\f2\b tan\'edeva
\f3\b0  = of showing] and ate and gave them to the men with him, though they are not permitted food for anyone except for the priests alone.\'94 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93The Son of Man is Lord of the day of rest.\'94\
	
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  It happened [lit. came] on another day of rest taht he went into the synagogue and taught. And [there] was there a man whose right hand was withered. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  The scribes and the Pharisees watched him, to see if he was going to heal anyone on the day of rest, for them to find a way [
\f2\b l\'e9
\f3\b0 ] with which they could accuse him. 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  But he knew how they thought, and yet he said to the man having the withered hand: \'93Rise and stand in the middle.\'94 And he arose and stood there. 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  Then Jesus said to them: \'93I ask of you: Is it allowed on the day of rest to do good or to do evil, to save a person or to destroy him?\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Ar apa yentes illi mici te, quenello quenenna, quentes i nerenna: \'93\'c1 rahta m\'e1lyanen!\'94 Carnes sie, ar m\'e1rya n\'e1ne envinyanta. 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Mal anelte qu\'e1tine ur\uc0\u351 anen, ar quentelte pa mana carumnelte Y\'e9sun.\
	
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  T\'fale ente auressen i lendes ama mir i oron hyamien, ar lemnes tasse ter i l\'f3me, hyamiesse Erunna. 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre aure t\'fale, yalles hildoryar ar ciller ho mici te yunque, i yando estanes aposteli: 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  S\'edmon, ye yando estanes P\'e9ter, ar Andr\'e9o h\'e1norya, ar Y\'e1cov and Yoh\'e1no, ar Filip ar Var\uc0\u351 olom\'e9o 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  ar  Matt\'e9o ar \uc0\u350 omas ar Y\'e1cov yondorya Alfaio, ar S\'edmon ye n\'e1 estaina i Selot, 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  ar Y\'fara yondorya Y\'e1cov, ar Y\'faras Iscariot, ye *vartane se.\
	
\f0\b 17 
\f1\b0 Ar t\'fales undu aselte ar tarne palaresse, ar enge hoa liy\'fame queniva ho i quanda Y\'farea ar Yer\'fasalem ar ho i earm\'e9nar *os T\'edr ar Siron, i t\'faler hlarien se ar n\'e1ven nestaine hl\'edveltaron. 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Yando i n\'e1ner *tarastaine lo \'fapoice faireli n\'e1ner nestaine. 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Ar i quanda \uc0\u351 anga cestaner appa se, an t\'fare lende et sello ar nestane illi mici te.\
\

\f2\i\b 10
\f3\b0  And after he looked at all among them, from person to person, he said to the man: \'93Reach out with your hand!\'94 He did so, and his hand was healed. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  But they were filled with rage, and spoke about what they were going to do to Jesus.\
	
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  It happened [lit. 'came'] in those days that he went up into the mountain to pray, and he remained there through the night, in prayer to God 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  But when day came, he summoned his disciples and chose from among them twelve, that he also named apostles: 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  Simon, whom he also called Peter, and Andrew his brother, and Jacob and John, and Phillip and Bartholomew 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  and Matthew and Thomas and Jacob the son of Alphaeus, and Simon who is called the Zealot, 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  and Judah son of Jacob, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.\
	
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  And he came down with them and stood on a plain, and [there] was a multitude of people from all of Judea and Jerusalemn and from the sea-regions arbout Tyre and Sidon, that came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  Also [those] that were tormented by unclean spirits were healed. 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  And the whole crowd sought to touch him, for power went out of him and healed all among them.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ar ortanes henduryat hilmoryannar ar quente: \'93Valime nar i penyar, an Eruo aranie n\'e1 *lenya!\
	
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Valime nar elde i nar maite s\'ed, an nauvalde qu\'e1tine!\
	Valime nar elde i nar yaimie, an laluvalde!\
	
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Valima nalde \'edre atani tevir le, ar \'edre queriltexer lello ar naityar le ar et-hatir esselda ve ulca, i Atanyondo m\'e1rien. 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Sama alasse aure entasse ar capa, an y\'e9! *paityalelda n\'e1 t\'fara menelde. An tai nar i imye nati yar atariltar carner i Eruterc\'e1noin.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 20
\f3\b0  And he raised his eyes towards his disciples and said: \'93Happy are the poor, for God's kingdom is yours!\
	
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  Happy are you that are hungry now, for you will be filled!\
	Happy are you that are wailing, for you will laugh!\
	
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  Happy you are when men hate you, and when they turn from you and abuse you and throw out your name as evil, for the good of the Son of Man. 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  Have joy in that day and leap, for behold! your reward is great in heaven. For those are the same things that their fathers did to the prophets.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Mal horro len i nar l\'e1rie, an as\'e1mielde quanda tiutalelda!\

\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Horro len i nar qu\'e1tine s\'ed, an nauvalde maite!\
Horro len i lalar s\'ed, an samuvalde ny\'e9re ar n\'edri!\

\f0\b 26 
\f1\b0 Horro len \'edre ilye atani quetir mai pa le, an m\'ed imya l\'e9 atariltar quenter pa i \'faanwe Eruterc\'e1nor!\

\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Mal quetin lenna i lastar: Mela \'f1ottoldar ar cara mai in tevir le, 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  \'e1 aista i h\'fatar le ar hyama in quetir ulco pa le. 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Yenna pete le er ventasse quera yando i exe, ar ye mapa collalya \'e1va pusta mapiello yando i laupe.\
\

\f2\i\b 24
\f3\b0  But woe to you that are rich, for you have received your entire comfort!\

\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  Woe to you that are full now, for you will be hungry!\
Woe to you that laugh now, for you will have grief and tears!\

\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for in the same manner their fathers spoke about the false prophets!\

\f2\b 27 
\f3\b0 But I say to you that listen: Love your enemies and do well to [those] that hate you, 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  bless [those] that curse you and pray for [those] who speak evil about you. 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  Towards [the one] that strikes you on one chin turn also the other, and [the one] that takes your cloak do not stop from taking also the tunic.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  \'c1 anta illin i arcar lyello, ar yello mapa natilyar \'e1va arca *nancame tai.\
	
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Ar ve merilde i atani caruvar len, sie cara tien.\
	
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Ar qui melilde i melir l\'e9, manen ta nauva a\uc0\u351 ea len? An yando i \'facarindor melir i melir t\'e9. 
\f0\b 33 
\f1\b0 Ar qui carilde m\'e1rie in carir m\'e1rie elden, manen ta nauva a\uc0\u351 ea len? Yando i \'facarindor carir i imya. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Ar qui *yutyal queni illon samil estel cami\'e9va, manen ta nauva a\uc0\u351 ea len? Yando \'facarindor *yutyar \'facarindor *nancamien i imya nonwa. 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  \'dasie, mela \'f1ottoldar ar cara m\'e1rie ar \'e1 *yutya exeli, \'fa estelo *nancami\'e9va, ar *paityalelda nauva t\'fara, ar nauvalde i Antaro yondor, an s\'e9 n\'e1 a\uc0\u351 ea  in uar anta hantale ar i ulcain. 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  \'c1 \'f3rava ve Atarelda \'f3rava!\
\

\f2\i\b 30
\f3\b0  Give to all that ask of you [sg], and from [the one] that takes your things, do not ask to receive them back.\
	
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  And as you [pl.] wish that men will do to you, so do to them.\
	
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  And if you love [those] that love you, how will that be beneficial for you? For also the sinners love [those] that love them. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  And if you do good to [those] that do good to you, how will that be beneficial for you? Also the sinners do the same. 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  And if you lend to people from whom you have hope of receiving, how will that be beneficial to you? Also sinners lend to sinners in order to receive back the same sum. 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  On the contrary, love your enemies and do good and lend to others, without hope of receiving back, and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind to [those] who do not give thanks and to the evil ones. 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  Show mercy like your Father shows mercy!\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Ente, \'e1va name, ar laume nauvalde n\'e1mine; \'e1va quete i exi nar valde paimeo, ar ua nauva qu\'e9tina pa l\'e9 i nalde valde paimeo. \'c1 lehta, ar nauvalde lehtaine. 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  \'c1 anta, ar mo antuva len. M\'e1ra lesta \'96 n\'edrina undu, p\'e1lina ar \'favea \'96 panyuvalte s\'famaldasse. An i lestanen yanen *etelestalde, *etelestuvalte len. \
	
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  T\'e1 yando quentes sestie t\'e9na: \'93Lau *c\'e9nel\'f3ra qu\'e9n pole tulya *c\'e9nel\'f3ra qu\'e9n? Ma y\'fayo uat lantuva mir unque? 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Ye pare ua or ye peanta, mal ilquen yen anaie aqua peantaina nauva ve ye peanta. 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Manen n\'e1, t\'e1, i y\'e9tal i lisce ya ea h\'e1nolyo hendesse, mal ualye cime i pano ya ea v\'e9ra hendelyasse? 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Manen ece lyen quete h\'e1nolyanna: 'H\'e1no, lava nin mapa i lisce et hendelyallo,' \'edre elye ua y\'e9ta i pano v\'e9ra hendelyasse?\
\

\f2\i\b 37
\f3\b0  Furthermore, do not judge, and you will by no means be judged; do not say that others are worthy of punishment, and [it] will not be said about you that you are worthy of punishment. Release, and you will be released. 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  Give, and one will give to you. A good measure \'96 pressed down, shaken and abundant \'96 they will place in your bosom. For by the measure with which you measure out, they will measure out to you.\
	
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  Then he also spoke this comparison: \'93Surely a blind person cannot lead a blind person? Will not both fall into a hollow? 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  [He] who learns is not above [the one] who instructs, but everyone that has been fully instructed will be like [the one] who instructs. 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  How is [it], then, that you look at the straw which is in your brother's eye, but you do not heed the plank which is in your own eye? 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  How is it possible for you to say to your brother: 'Brother, allow me to take the straw out of your eye,' when you do not look at the plank in your own eye?\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  An ua ea m\'e1ra alda c\'e1rala \uc0\u351 aura y\'e1ve; ata ua ea \u351 aura alda c\'e1rala m\'e1ra y\'e1ve. 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  An ilya alda n\'e1 sinwa y\'e1veryanen. An queni uar hosta *r\'e9ly\'e1vi necelillon; ente, ualte cire *tiumar ho neceltussa. 
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  M\'e1ra atan tala m\'e1rie et endaryo m\'e1ra harmallo, mal ulca atan tala ulco et ulca harmaryallo, an et i endo \'favello antorya quete.\
	
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  Manen n\'e1 i estalde ni 'Heru, Heru', ananta ualde care i nati yar quetin? 
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  Ilquen ye tule ninna ar hlare quettanyar ar care tai \'96 tanuvan len as man mo pole sesta se: 
\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  N\'e1se ve qu\'e9n carastala coa, ye sampe ar panyane i talma i ondosse. Etta, \'edre enge oloire, i s\'edre palpane sana coanna, mal uas polle pale sa, pan anes mai carastaina. 
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  Mal ye ahl\'e1rie ar ua care, n\'e1 ve n\'e9r ye carastane coa i talamesse \'fa talmo. Sanna i s\'edre pente, ar m\'ed tana l\'fa talantes, ar coa tano atalantie n\'e1ne t\'fara.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 43
\f3\b0  For [there] does not exist [any] good tree producing foul fruit; again [there] does not exist [any] foul tree producing good fruit. 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  For every tree is known by its fruit. For people do not gather figs from thorns; furthermore, they do not cut grapes from a thorn-bush. 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  A good man brings good out of his heart's hidden treasure, but an evil man brings evil out of his evil treasure, for out of the heart's abundance his mouth speaks.\
	
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  How is [it] that you call me 'Lord, Lord', and yet you do not do the things that I say? 
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  Everyone who comes to me and hears my words and does them \'96 I will show you with whom one can compare him: 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  He is like a person building a house, who dug and put the foundation upon the rock. Therefore, when [there] was flood, the river beat against that house, but it could not shake it, since it was well built.\
	
\f2\b 49
\f3\b0  But [the one] who has heard and does not do, is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. Against it the river beat, and in that moment it collapsed, and the collapse of that house was great.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 7\

\f1\b0 Apa telyanes ilye quetieryar \'edre i lie lastane, lendes mir Capernaum. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Mal *tuxanturo m\'f3l, ye n\'e1ne melda sen, n\'e1ne nimpa ar hare eff\'edrienna. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  \'cdre hlasses pa Y\'e9sus, mentanes senna amy\'e1rali i Y\'fararon arcien sello tule ar etelehta m\'f3lya. 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  T\'e1 i t\'faler Y\'e9sunna carner arcande sello ar quenter: \'93N\'e1se valda i caril nat sina sen, 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  an melis n\'f3relva, ar s\'e9 carastane men i *yomencoa.\'94 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus lende aselte. Mal \'edre \'fanes haira i coallo, i *tuxantur n\'f3vo mentane meldoli quetieltan senna: \'93Heru, \'e1va *tarasta imle, an uan valda i tulil nu t\'f3panya.\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 7\

\f3\b0 After he completed all his sayings while the people listened, he went into Capernaum. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  But the slave of a centurion, who was dear to him, was ailing and near to expiring. 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  When he heard about Jesus, he sent to him some elders of the Jews to request him to come and to deliver his slave. 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  Then [those] that came to Jesus made petition of him and said: \'93He is worthy that you do this thing for him, 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  for he loves our nation, and \ul he\ulnone  built for us the synagoge.\'94 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  And Jesus went with them. But when he was not far from the house, the centurion beforehand sent some friends for them to say to him: \'93Lord, do not trouble yourself, for I am not worthy that you come under my roof.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Etta \'fanen note imne valda tulien lyenna. Mal queta i quetta ar tyara m\'f3linya n\'e1ve nestaina. 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  An yando inye n\'e1 n\'e9r nu t\'fare, arwa ohtallion nu ni, ar qui quetin sinanna: Mena! \'96 t\'e1 m\'e9nas, hya exenna: Tula! \'96 t\'e1 tulis, hya m\'f3linyanna: Cara sie! \'96 t\'e1 caris ta.\'94
\f0\b  9
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre Y\'e9sus hlasse nati sine anes qu\'e1tina elmendanen pa se, ar quernes inse i \uc0\u351 anganna hilyala se ar quente: \'93Nyarin len, yando Israelde uan ih\'edrie savie ta t\'fara.\'94 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Ar i n\'e1ner mentaine, \'edre nanwennelte i coanna, hirner i m\'f3l m\'e1lesse.\
\

\f2\i\b 7
\f3\b0  Therefore I did not count myself worthy to come to you. But say the word and cause my slave to be healed. 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  For I as well am a man under authority [t\'fare = power], having soldiers under me, and if I say to this one: Go! \'96 then he goes, or to another: Come! \'96 then he comes, or to my slave: Do so! \'96 then he does that.\'94 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  And when Jesus heard these things he was filled with wonder about him, and he turned [Q: turned himself] to the crowd following him and said: \'93I tell you, even in Israel I have not found a faith that great.\'94 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  And [the ones] that were sent, when they returned to the house, found the slave in health.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Ar epeta martane i lendes mir osto estaina Nain, ar hildoryar ar hoa \uc0\u351 anga lender \'f3se. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre t\'fales hare i osto andonna, qualin n\'e9r n\'e1ne c\'f3lina ettenna, amilleryo *ern\'f3na yondo. Ente, verurya n\'e1ne qualin. Hoa \uc0\u351 anga i ostollo enge yando as i n\'eds.\

\f3\i \
	
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  And thereafter [it] happened that he went into a city called Nain, and his disciples and a great crowd went with him. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  And when he came near to the gate of the city, a dead man was carried outside, the only-born son of his mother. Furthermore, her husband was dead. A great crowd from the city was also with the woman.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre i Heru cenne se, endarya etelende senna, ar quentes senna: \'93\'c1va na yaimea!\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Ar t\'falienwa hare appanes i tulma, ar i colindor pustaner, ar quentes: \'93Nessa n\'e9r, quetin lyenna: \'c1 orta!\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Ar i qualin n\'e9r hamne ama ar *yestane carpa, ar Y\'e9sus se-antane amilleryan. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  S\'ed rucie nampe te illi, ar antanelte alcar Erun, qu\'e9tala: \'93T\'fara Eruterc\'e1no anaie ortaina ama mici ve,\'94 ar: \'93Eru ic\'edmie lierya!\'94 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Ar quetta sina vistane mir quanda Y\'farea ar i quanda *oscaitala n\'f3rienna. \
	
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ar Yoh\'e1no hildor nyarner sen pa ilye nati sine. 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Ar Yoh\'e1no yalle atta hildoryaron ar mentane tu i Herunna quetien: \'93Ma elye n\'e1 ye tulumne, hya ma mauya men y\'e9ta ompa exenna?\'94 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  \'cdre t\'falette senna, i neri quenter: \'93Yoh\'e1no i *Tumyando mentane met lyenna quetien: Ma elye n\'e1 ye tulumne, hya ma mauya men y\'e9ta ompa exenna?\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 12
\f3\b0  And when the Lord saw her, his heart went out to her, and he said to her: \'93Do not be wailing!\'94 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  And having come near he touched the bier, and the bearers stopped, and he said: \'93Young man, I say to you: Rise!\'94 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  And the dead man sat up and started to talk, and Jesus gave him to his mother. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  Now fear seized them all, and they gave glory to God, saying: \'93A great prophet has been raised up among us,\'94 and: \'93God has heeded his people!\'94 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  And this word spread into all Judea and the whole around-lying country.\
	
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  And John's disciples told him about all these things. 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  And John called two of his disciples and sent them [
\f2\b tu
\f3\b0 , dual] to the Lord to say: \'93Are you [the one] that was going to come, or is it necessary for us to look forward to another?\'94 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  When they [-
\f2\b tte
\f3\b0 , dual] came to him, the men said: \'93John the Baptist sent us to you to say: Are you [the one] that was going to come, or is it necessary for us to look forward to another?\'94\

\f1\i0 \
 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  L\'fame yanasse nestanes rimbali, leryala te hl\'edvellon ar perperiellon ar olce fairellon, ar rimbe *c\'e9nel\'f3ralin tyarnes *c\'e9ne. 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Ar hanquentes t\'fana: \'93\'c1 auta, nyara Yoh\'e1non ya cennette ar hlassette: I *c\'e9nel\'f3rar camir *c\'e9ne, i helmahlaiwar nar poitaine ar i penner hlarie hlarir, i qualini nar ortaine, ar valima n\'e1 ye ua hire nisse casta talti\'e9va.\'94\
	
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Apa i neri mentaine lo Yoh\'e1no oanter, *yestanes carpa i \uc0\u351 angannar pa Yoh\'e1no: \'93Mana lendelde mir i erume y\'e9tien? Lisce l\'e9vala i \u351 \'farinen? 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  L\'e1, mana etelendelde cenien? N\'e9r arwa mussi lannion? Y\'e9, i arwar mussi lannion ear coassen araniva! 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Mal mana castalda etelelien? Cenie Eruterc\'e1no? N\'e1, quetin lenna, ar ambela Eruterc\'e1no! \
\

\f2\i\b 21
\f3\b0  In that hour he healed numerous ones, freeing them from illnesses and from sufferings and from wicked spirits, and many blind ones he caused to see. 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  And he answered them [
\f2\b t\'fana
\f3\b0 , dual]: \'93Go away, tell John what you [dual] saw and heard: The blind receive sight, the skin-diseased are made clean and [those] that lacked hearing hear, the dead ones are raised, and happy is [the one] that does not find in me a cause for falling.\'94\
	
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  After the men send by John went away, he began to speak to the crowds about John: \'93What did you go into the desert to look at? A reed moving by the wind? 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  No, what did you go out to see? A man having soft clothes? Behold, those having soft clothes are in the houses of kings! 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  But what [was] your reason for going out? To see a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and much more than a prophet!\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  S\'e9 n\'e1ne pa ye anaie t\'e9cina: 'Y\'e9! Mentan terc\'e1nonya epe cendelelya, manwien mallelya epe lye.' 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Nyarin len: Im\'edca i n\'e1ner n\'f3ne lo nissi ea *\'faquen t\'fara l\'e1 Yoh\'e1no, mal qu\'e9n im\'edca i ambe pityar Eruo araniesse n\'e1 t\'fara l\'e1 s\'e9.\'94 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Ar i quanda lie ar i *tungwemor, \'edre hlasselte ta, quenter i Eru n\'e1ne faila, t\'e9 n\'e1la *tumyaine Yoh\'e1no *tumyal\'e9nen. Mal i Farisar ar i *\uc0\u351 anyengolmor querner oa ya Eru merne tien, t\'e9 i \'faner *tumyaine lo s\'e9.\
	
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  \'93As man, t\'e1, sestuvan *n\'f3nare sina? 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Nalte ve h\'ednar h\'e1mala mi mancan\'f3me ar y\'e1mala qu\'e9n i exenna: 'Tyallelme i simpa len, mal ualde liltane; anelme yaimie, mal ualde s\'e1me n\'edri.' 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  An Yoh\'e1no i *Tumyando ut\'falie, l\'e1 m\'e1tala massa hya s\'facala limpe, mal quetilde: 'N\'e1se haryaina lo rauco!' 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  I Atanyondo ut\'falie, m\'e1tala ar s\'facala, mal quetilde: 'Ela! N\'e9r *accam\'e1tala ar antaina sucien limpe, meldo *tungwemoron ar \'facarindoron!' 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Ananta sailie n\'e1 tanaina faila lo ilye h\'ednaryar.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 27
\f3\b0  He was [the one] about whom it has been written: 'Behold! I send my herald before your face, to prepare your way before you.' 
\f2\b 28 
\f3\b0 I tell you: Among [those] that were born of women [there] is no one greater than John, but a person among the smaller in God's kingdom is greater than he.\'94 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  And the whole people and the tax collectors, when they heard that, said that God was just, they being baptized with John's baptism. But the Pharisees and the lawyers turned away [that] which God wanted for them, they that were not baptized by him.\
	
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  \'93With whom, then, shall I compare this generation? 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  They are like children sitting in a market-place and crying one to the other: 'We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we were wailing, but you did not have tears.' 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  For John the Baptist has come, not eating bread or drinking vine, but you say: He is possessed by a demon! 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  The Son of Man has come, eating and drinking, but you say: Look! A man over-eating and given to drinking vine, friend of tax collectors and sinners!' 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  And yet wisdom is shown [to be] just by all its children.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 	36
\f1\b0  Qu\'e9n im\'edca i Farisar arcane i Y\'e9sus matumne \'f3se, ar t\'falala mir coa i Farisava caines undu ara i sarno. 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! n\'eds ye n\'e1ne sinwa i ostosse ve *\'facarinde parne i enges ara i sarno coasse i Farisava, ar mancanes insen ondocolca n\'ed\uc0\u351 ima milleo, 
\f0\b 38 
\f1\b0 ar t\'e1rala n\'edressen ca Y\'e9sus ara talyat, i n\'eds *yestane care talyat mixe n\'edreryainen ar *aupsarne tai caryo findel\'e9nen, ar minques talyat ar *l\'edve tu i n\'ed\uc0\u351 ima millonen. 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  C\'e9nala ta, i Farisa ye yalle Y\'e9sus quente insenna: \'93N\'e9r sina, qui anes Eruterc\'e1no, istumne man ar mana nostaleo n\'e1 n\'eds sina ye appea se \'96 i n\'e1se *\'facarinde!\'94 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Mal hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93S\'edmon, samin nat ya merin quete lyenna.\'94 Eques: \'93*Peantar, queta sa!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 	36
\f3\b0  A person among the Pharisees requested that Jesus was to eat with him, and coming into the Pharisee's house he laid down by the table. 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  And behold! a woman who was known in the city as a sinner learnt that he was at the table in the house of the Pharisees, and she bought [lit. traded to herself] a stone-box of fragrant oil, 
\f2\b 38 
\f3\b0 and standing in tears behind Jesus by his feet, the woman started to make his feet wet with her tears and wiped them off with the hair of her head, and she kissed his feet and annointed them with the fragrant oil. 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  Seeing that, the Pharisee who invited Jesus said to himself: \'93This man, if he was a prophet, would know who and of what kind is this woman that is touching him \'96 that she is a sinner!\'94 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  But in answer Jesus said to him: \'93Simon, I have something that I want to say to you.\'94 He said: \'93Teacher, say it!\'94\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 41 
\f1\b0 \'93N\'e9r atta s\'e1met rohta quenen yello camnette telpe; er s\'e1me rohta \ul len\'e1rion\ulnone  tuxar lempe, i exe, *lepenquean. 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  \'cdre s\'e1melte munta *nanantien sen, y\'fayon apsennes. T\'e1 man mici t\'fa meluva se ambe?\'94 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse S\'edmon quente: \'93Intyan i qu\'e9n yenen apsennes i anhoa nonwe.\'94 Quentes senna: \'93Namnes mai.\'94\
	
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quernes inse i nissenna ar quente S\'edmondenna: \'93Ma c\'e9nal n\'eds sina? T\'falen mir coalya; ual antane nin n\'e9n talunyant. Mal n\'eds sina carne talunyat mixe n\'edreryainen ar *aupsarne tai findeleryanen. 
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  Ual antane nin mique, mal n\'eds sina, i l\'famello ya t\'falen, ua pustane mique talunyat. 
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  Ual *l\'edve carinya millonen, mal n\'eds sina *l\'edve talunyat n\'ed\uc0\u351 ima millonen. 
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  Sina castanen quetin lyenna: R\'edmbe \'facareryar nar aps\'e9nine sen, an m\'e9les ole; mal yen pitya n\'e1 aps\'e9nina, mele pityave.\'94\
\
	
\f3\i \'93Two men had a debt to a person from whom they received money; one had a debt of five hundred denarii, the other, fifty. 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  When they had nothing to give back to him, he foregave both. Then who among them [
\f2\b t\'fa
\f3\b0 , dual] will love him [the] more?\'94 
\f2\b 43
\f3\b0  In answer Simon said: \'93I suppose the person to whom he forgave the greatest sum.\'94 He said to him: \'93You judged well.\'94\
	
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  Then he turned [Q: turned himself] to the woman and said to Simon: \'93Are you seeing this woman? I came into your house; you did not give me water for my feet. But this woman made my feet wet with her tears and wiped them away with her hair. 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  You did not give me [any] kiss, but this woman, from the hour that I came, did not cease to kiss my feet. 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  You did not anoint my head with oil, but this woman anointed my feet with fragrant oil. 
\f2\b 47 
\f3\b0 For this reason I say to you: Her numerous sins are forgiven her, for she loved much; but [the one] to whom a little is forgiven, loves little.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes senna: \'93\'dacarelyar nar aps\'e9nine.\'94 
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  Mal i cainer \'f3se as i sarno *yestaner quete intesse: \'93Man n\'e1 n\'e9r sina ye yando apsene \'facari?\'94 
\f0\b 50
\f1\b0  Ono quentes i nissenna: \'93Savielya erehtie lye; mena rainesse.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 48
\f3\b0  Then he said to her: \'93Your sins are forgiven.\'94 
\f2\b 49
\f3\b0  But those who lay with him at the table began to say in themselves: \'93Who is this man that also forgives sins?\'94 But he said to the woman: \'93Your faith has saved you; go in peace.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 8\

\f1\b0 Ar t\'fale epeta i lendes ostollo ostonna ar mastollo mastonna ar peantane ar carne sinwa i evandilyon pa Eruo aranie, ar i yunque hilyaner se, ve carner nisseli i n\'e1ner nestaine olce fairellon ar hl\'edvellon: Mar\'eda ye n\'e1ne estaina Mahtal\'e9ne, yello raucor otso n\'e1ner ett\'falienwe, 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  ar Yoanna verirya C\'fasa, Herolo c\'e1no, ar Susanna ar rimbe hyane nisseli, i *veuyaner sen armaltainen.\
	
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  S\'ed \'edre hoa \uc0\u351 anga n\'e1ne oc\'f3mienwa as i lender \'f3se ostollo ostonna, quentes t\'e9na sesti\'e9nen: 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  \'93*Rerindo etelende rerien. Rerieryasse erdeli lantaner ara i malle ar n\'e1ne *vattaina undu, ar menelo aiwi manter tai. \
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 8\

\f3\b0 And it happened [lit. came] thereafter that he went from city to city and from village to vilalge and taught and made known the gospel about God's kingdom, and the twelve followed him, as did some women that were healed from wicked spirit and illneses: Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  and Joanna the wife of Cuza, Herod's commander, and Susanna and numerous other women, who served him with their goods.\
	
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  Now when a great crowd had gathered with [those] that went with him from city to city, he said to them in a comparison: 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  \'93A sower went out to sow. In his sowing some seeds fell beside the road and were trampled down, and the birds of heaven ate them. \

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Exeli lantaner i ondonna, ar apa tuianelte hestanelte, peni\'e9nen n\'e9n. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Exeli lantaner im\'edca i neceli, ar i neceli i aller ama aselte quorner te. 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Exeli lantaner i m\'e1ra cemenna, ar apa tuianelte carnelte y\'e1ve, nap\'e1nine lestar t\'faxa.\'94 Apa nyarie nati sine, y\'e1mes: \'93Nai ye same hlaru hlaruva!\'94\
	
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Mal hildoryar maquenter senna: \'93Mana tea i sestie?\'94 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Eques: \'93Elden n\'e1 antaina ista  Eruo arani\'e9no f\'f3ler, mal i exin nas sestiessen, ty\'e1rala te y\'e9ta \'fa ceni\'e9no ar hlare \'fa hani\'e9no. 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Si n\'e1 ya tea i sestie: I erde n\'e1 Eruo quetta. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  I nar ara i malle nar i ahl\'e1rier; t\'e1 i Arauco tule ar mapa oa i quetta endaltallo, pustien te saviello ar n\'e1vello rehtaine.\
\

\f2\i\b 6
\f3\b0  Others fell upon the rock, and after they sprouted they withered, for lacking water. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns that grew up with them choked them. 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  Others fell upon the good soil, and after they sprouted they made fruit, a hundred added measures.\'94 After telling these things, he cried: \'93May [the one] that has ears hear!\'94\
	
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  But his disciples asked him: \'93What does the comparison mean?\'94 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  He said: \'93To you [it] is given to know the secrets of God's kingdom, but to the others it is in comparisons, causing them to look without seeing and hear without understanding. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  This is what the comparison means: The seed is God's word. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  [The ones] that are beside the road are [the ones] that have heard; then the Devil comes and takes away the word from their heart, to stop them from believing and from being saved.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  I nar i ondosse nar i camir i quetta alassenen \'edre hlariltes, mal t\'e9 uar same \uc0\u351 undo; savilte ter l\'fame, mal l\'famesse tyasti\'e9no lantalte oa. 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  I lantaner im\'edca i neceli, t\'e9 nar i ahl\'e1rier, mal n\'e1la c\'f3line oa coive sino querel\'ednen ar larnen ar alass\'ednen, nalte qu\'f3rine ar telyar munta. 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Mal i nar i m\'e1ra cemesse, t\'e9 nar i hlarir i quetta m\'e1ra ar vanya endanen ar hepir sa ar colir y\'e1ve voronwi\'e9nen.\
	
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ea *\'faquen ye, apa nartie calma, tupe sa venenen hya panya sa nu caima, mal sa-panyas i calmatarmasse, l\'e1vala in tulir minna y\'e9ta i cala. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  An ea munta nurtaina ya ua nauva apantaina, hya *aiqua halyaina ya ua oi nauva sinwa hya a\uc0\u351 c\'e9nima.\
\

\f2\i\b 13
\f3\b0  [The ones] that are on the rock are [those] that receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they do not have [any] root; they believe for [
\f2\b ter
\f3\b0  = through] a time, but in a time of testing they fall away. 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  [Those] that fell among the thorns, they are [the ones] that have heard, but being carried away by the anxieties of this life and by riches and by joys, they are choked and complete nothing. 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  But [the ones] that are on the good soil, they are [the ones] that hear the word with a good and beautiful heard and keep it and make fruit by steadfastness.\
	
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  [There] is no one who, after kindling a lamp, covers it with a vessel or puts it under a bed, but he puts it on the lampstand, allowing [the ones] that come inside to look at the light. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  And [there] is nothing hidden that will not be revealed, or anything veiled that will not ever be known or easily seen.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Etta cima manen lastalde, an aiquen ye same, amba nauva antaina sen, mal aiquen ye ua same, yando ya savis i samis nauva mapaina sello.\'94\
	
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  S\'ed amillerya ar h\'e1noryar t\'faler senna, mal ualte polle rahta senna i \uc0\u351 anganen. 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Mal mo nyarne sen: \'93Amillelya ar h\'e1noldar t\'e1rar i ettesse, m\'e9rala vele lye.\'94 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse quentes t\'e9na: \'93Amillinya ar h\'e1nonyar nar i hlarir Eruo quetta ar carir sa.\'94\
	
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  T\'fale mi er i aurion i s\'e9 ar hildoryar lender mir lunte, ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Alve lahta i hyana f\'e1ranna i ailino.\'94 Sie cirnelte oa. 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre cirnelte humnes. S\'ed raumo lantane i ailinna, ar luntelta n\'e1ne qu\'e1tina, ar anelte raxesse. 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  I mettasse lendelte senna ar eccoitaner se, qu\'e9tala: \'93*Peantar, *peantar, qu\'e1lalme!\'94 Mal apa ortie naityanes i \uc0\u351 \'fare ar i neno orme, ar anelte c\'e1rine sende, ar enge quilde. \
\

\f2\i\b 18
\f3\b0  Therefore take heed how you listen, for anyone who has, more will be given to him, but anyone who does not have, also [that] which he believes he has will be taken from him.\'94\
	
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  Now his mother and his brothers came to him, but they could not reach to him because of the crowd. 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  But one told him: \'93Your mother and your brothers are standing on the outside, wishing to see [or, meet] you.\'94 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  In answer he said to them: \'93My mother and my brothers are [those] who hear God's word and do it.\'94\
	
\f2\b 22 
\f3\b0 It happened [lit. came] in one of the days that he and his disciples went into a boat, and he said to them: \'93Let us pass over to the other shore of the lake.\'94 Thus they sailed away. 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  But while they sailed he slept. Now a storm fell upon the lake, and their boat was filled, and they were in danger. 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  In the end they went to him and woke him up, saying: \'93Teacher, teacher, we are dying!\'94 But after rising he rebuked the wind and the violence of the water, and they were made [to be] at rest, and [there] was a silence.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93Masse savielda?\'94 Mal n\'e1la ruhtaine anelte elmendasse, qu\'e9tala qu\'e9n i exenna: \'93\'c9 man n\'e1 n\'e9r sina, an canis yando i \uc0\u351 \'farin ar i nenen, ar carilte ve quetis?\'94\
	
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Ar cirnelte n\'f3rienna Erasenyaiva, ya caita i hyana hrestasse Alileallo. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre lendes norenna, se-velle n\'e9r i ostollo ye n\'e1ne haryaina lo rauco; ter anda l\'fame uas colle lanni, ar uas marne coasse, mal im\'edca i noiri. 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  \'cdre cennes Yesus, y\'e1mes ar lantane undu epe se, ar quentes taura \'f3manen: \'93Mana nin ar lyen, Y\'e9sus, Eru Antaro yondo? Iquin lyello, \'e1vani \'f1walya!' 
\f0\b 29 
\f1\b0 An cannes i \'fapoica fairen tule et i nerello. N\'f3vo i rauco ter anda l\'fame hempe i n\'e9r tanca, ar anes n\'fatina limill\'ednen ar n\'fatel\'ednen talyatse, \'edre cundor tirner se, mal narcanes i n\'fati ar n\'e1ne \'e9lina lo i rauco mir i erinque n\'f3mi.\
\

\f2\i\b 25
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93Where [is] your faith?\'94 But being scared they were in wonder, saying one to the other: \'93Who indeed is this man, for he commands also [or, even] the winds and the water, and they do as he says?\'94\
	
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  And they sailed to [the] country of the Gerasenes, which lies on the other shore from Galilee. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  And when he went on land, [there] met him a man from the city who was possessed by a a demon; for [
\f2\b ter
\f3\b0 , 'through'] a long time he did not bear clothes, and he did not dwell in a house, but among the tombs. 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  When he saw Jesus, he cried [out] and fell down before him, and he said in a mighty voice: \'93What [is there] for me and for you [= what do you have to do with me], Jesus, son of the Most High God? I beg of you, to not torment me!\'94 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  For he commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. Beforehand the demon for a long time kept the man fast, and he was bound by chains and by bonds on his feet, while guards watched him, but he tore over the bonds and was driven by the demon into the lonely places.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus maquente senna: \'93Mana esselya?\'94 Eques: \'93\ul Lehion\ulnone ,\'94 an rimbe raucoli n\'e1ner m\'e9nienwe mir se. 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Ar arcanelte sello i \'e1vas mentumne te mir i undume. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Mal enge tasse hoa l\'e1m\'e1re polcaiva nesselesse m\'ed oron, ar arcandelte sello i lavumnes tien auta mir t\'e9. Ar l\'e1ves tien. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  T\'e1 i raucor etelender et i nerello ar menner mir i polcar, ar i l\'e1m\'e1re lende rimpa olla i lanca mir i ailin ar quorner. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre i mavari cenner ya n\'e1ne martienwa, \'fa\uc0\u351 elte ar nyarner sa i ostosse ar i restassen.\
	
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  T\'e1 queni ett\'faler cenien ya n\'e1ne martienwa, ar t\'falelte Y\'e9sunna ar hirne i n\'e9r yello i raucor n\'e1ner ett\'falienwe, c\'f3lala lanneli ar m\'e1lesse s\'e1mo, h\'e1mala ara Y\'e9suo talu, ar anelte ruhtaine. \
\

\f2\i\b 30
\f3\b0  Jesus asked him: \'93What is your name?\'94 He said, \'93Legion,\'94 for numerous demons had gone into him. 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  And they requested of him that he would not send them into the abyss. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  But [there] was there a great flock of swine on pasture in the mountain, and they requested of him that he would allow them to pass into them. And he allowed them. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  Then the demons went out of the man and went into the swine, and the flock went rushing over the edge into the lake and drowned. 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  But when the herders saw [that] which had happened, they fled and told it in the city and in the fields. \
	
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  Then people came out to see [that] which had happened, and they came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had come out, bearing clothes and in health of mind, sitting by Jesus' feet, and they were terrified.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  I cenner sa nyarner tien manen i raucoharyaina n\'e9r n\'e1ne rehtaina. 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Ar i quanda liy\'fame i *oscaitala n\'f3riello Erasenyaiva arcaner sello i autumnes tello, an anelte mapaine t\'fara ruci\'e9nen. T\'e1 lendes mir i lunte ar cirne oa. 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Ono i n\'e9r et yello i raucor n\'e1ner t\'falienwe inque i lavumnes sen lemya \'f3se. Mal mentanes i n\'e9r oa, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  \'93Nanwena marelyanna, ar nyara pa i nati yar Eru ac\'e1rie lyen.\'94 Ar lendes oa ter i quanda osto, c\'e1rala sinwa ilqua ya Y\'e9sus carne sen.\
	
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  \'cdre Y\'e9sus nanwenne, anes c\'e1mina lo i \uc0\u351 anga, an illi *lartaner sen. 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Mal y\'e9! n\'e9r estaina Yairo t\'fale, ar s\'e9 n\'e1ne i turco i *yomencavo. Ar lantanes undu epe Y\'e9suo occat ar arcane sello i tulumnes coaryanna, 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  an enge \'f3se yelde, erya h\'ednarya, ye s\'e1me *os loar yunque, ar s\'e9 n\'e1ne hare qualmenna.\
\

\f2\i\b 36 
\f3\b0 [Those] that saw it told to them how the demon-possessed man was saved. 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  And the whole multitude from the around-lying country of [the] Gerasenes requested of him that he would go away from them, for they were seized by great fear. Then he went into the boat and sailed away. 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  But the man out of whom the demons were come begged that he would allow him to remain with him. But he sent the man away, saying: 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  \'93Return to your home, and tell about the things that God has done for you.\'94 And he went away through the entire city, making known everything that Jesus did for him.\
	
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  When Jesus returned [i.e. to where he had come from], he was received by the crowd, for all waited for him. 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  But behold! a man called Jairus came, and he was the chief of the synagogue. And he fell down before Jesus' knees [
\f2\b occat
\f3\b0 , dual] and requested of him that he would come to his house, 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  for [there] was with him a daughter, his only child, who had [an age of] about twelve years, and she near to death.\
\

\f1\i0 \'cdre Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne malleryasse, i \uc0\u351 angar ninder senna. 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  Ar n\'eds, ye ter loar yunque perp\'e9re celum\'e9nen serceva, yen ua ence \'f1ete nestie ho aiquen, 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  t\'fale ca se ar appane collaryo lane, ar m\'ed imya l\'fa i celume serceva pustane. 
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  Ar eque Y\'e9sus: \'93Man n\'e1ne ye appane ni?\'94 \'cdre illi laquenter sa, P\'e9ter quente: \'93*Peantar, i \uc0\u351 angar lumnar lyen ar n\'edrar lyenna.\'94 
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  Ananta Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Qu\'e9n appane ni, an t\'fanen i lende t\'fare et nillo.\'94 
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  C\'e9nala i uas \'fa\uc0\u351 e tuntie, i n\'eds t\'fale p\'e1lala ar lantane undu epe se ar nyarne epe i quanda lie i casta yanen appanes Y\'e9sus ar manen anes nestaina m\'ed imya l\'fa. 
\f0\b 48 
\f1\b0 Mal Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Yelde, savielya erehtie lye; \'e1 auta rainesse!\'94\
\

\f3\i When Jesus was on his way, the crowds pressed against him. 
\f2\b 43 
\f3\b0 And a woman, who for [
\f2\b ter
\f3\b0  = through] twelve years suffered from [-
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] a flood of blood, for whom it was not possible to get healing from anyone, 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  came behind him and touched the rim of his cloak, and in the same moment the flood of blood stopped. 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  And Jesus said: \'93Who was [the one] that touched me?\'94 When all denied it, Peter said: \'93Teacher, the crowds lie heavily on you and are pressing against you.\'94 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  And yet Jesus said: \'93A person touched me, for I perceived that [there] went power out of me.\'94 
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  Seeing that she did not escape notice, the woman came trembling and fell down before him and told before the whole people the reason why [
\f2\b yanen
\f3\b0  = by which] she touched Jesus and how she was healed in the same moment. 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  But Jesus said to her: \'93Daughter, your faith has saved you; go away in peace!\'94\

\f2\b \

\f1\i0\b0 	
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  \'cdre en quentes, n\'e9r t\'fale coallo i turcova i *yomencavo, qu\'e9tala: \'93Yeldelya aqu\'e1lie. \'c1va *tarasta i *peantar ambe.\'94 
\f0\b 50
\f1\b0  Mal hl\'e1rala ta, Y\'e9sus hanquente senna: \'93\'c1va ruce; eryave sava, ar nauvas rehtaina.\'94 
\f0\b 51
\f1\b0  \'cdre t\'fales i coanna uas l\'e1ve aiquenen lelya minna, hequa P\'e9teren ar Yoh\'e1non ar Y\'e1coven ar i vendeo ataren yo amillen. 
\f0\b 52
\f1\b0  Mal queni n\'e1ner yaimie ar palpaner inte ny\'e9resse pa i vende. Ar eques: \'93\'c1va na yaimie, an uas qualle, mal nas lorna.\'94 
\f0\b 53
\f1\b0  T\'e1 lalanelte senna, pan sintelte i anes qualin. 
\f0\b 54
\f1\b0  Mal nampes m\'e1rya ar y\'e1me, qu\'e9tala: \'93Vende, \'e1 orta!\'94 
\f0\b 55
\f1\b0  Ar fairerya nanwenne, ar orontes m\'ed imya l\'fa, ar Y\'e9sus canne i mo antane sen nat matien. 
\f0\b 56
\f1\b0  Ar nostaryat n\'e1net ara *intu; mal peantanes t\'fan i \'e1vatte nyare aiquenen pa ya n\'e1ne martienwa.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 49
\f3\b0  While he still spoke, a man came from [the] house of the chief of the synagogue, saying: \'93Your daughter has died. Do not trouble the teacher [any]more.\'94 
\f2\b 50
\f3\b0  But hearing that, Jesus answered him: \'93Do not be afraid; solely believe, and she will be saved.\'94 
\f2\b 51
\f3\b0  When he came to the house he did not allow anyone to go inside, except Peter and John and Jacob and the maiden's father and mother. 
\f2\b 52
\f3\b0  But people were wailing and beat themselves in grief about the maiden. And he said: \'93Do not be wailing, for she did not die, but she is asleep.\'94 
\f2\b 53
\f3\b0  Then they laughed at him, since they knew that she was dead. 
\f2\b 54
\f3\b0  But he took her hand and cried [out], saying: \'93Maiden, rise!\'94 
\f2\b 55
\f3\b0  And her spirit returned, and she arose in the same moment, and Jesus commanded that one gave her something to eat. 
\f2\b 56
\f3\b0  And her parents were beside themselves; but he instructed them that they were not to tell anyone about [that] which had happened.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 9\

\f1\b0 T\'e1 tultanes i yunque ar antane tien turie ar t\'fare or ilye i raucor, ar l\'e1ve tien nesta hl\'edvi. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Ar te-mentanes carien sinwa Eruo aranie ar nestien, 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Cola munta i lendan \'96 l\'e1 vandil hya poco, l\'e1 masta hya telpe, ar \'e1va tala laupe atta.\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 9\

\f3\b0 Then he summoned the twelve and gave them control and power over all the demonds, and allowed them to heal diseases. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  And he sent them to make known God's kingdom and to heal, 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  and he said to them: \'93Carry nothing for the journey \'96 not staff or bag, not bread or money, and do not bring two tunics.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre lelyalde mir coa, \'e1 lemya tasse ar \'e1 auta talo. 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ar mi ilya n\'f3me yasse queni uar cime le, \'edre autealde sana ostollo \'e1 pala i asto taluldalto ve *vettie tien.\'94 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  T\'e1, etelelyala, lendelte ter i m\'e9na mastollo mastonna, c\'e1rala sinwa i evandilyon ar nestala queni ilya n\'f3messe.\
	
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  S\'ed Herol i *canastantur hlasse pa ilqua ya martane, ar anes r\'facina, pan n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina lo quelli i Yoh\'e1no n\'e1ne ortaina et qualinillon, 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  mal lo exeli i El\'eda n\'e1ne t\'falienwa, mal lo exeli i n\'e1ne ortaina er im\'edca i enwine Eruterc\'e1nor. 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Eque Herol: \'93Yoh\'e1no cas aucirnen. Man, t\'e1, n\'e1 qu\'e9n sina pa ye hlarin taiti nati?\'94 Ar cestanes velitas.\
\

\f2\i\b 4
\f3\b0  But when you go into a house, remain there and go away from there. 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  For in every place where people do not heed you, when you are going away from that city shake the dust from your feet [dual] as a witness to them.\'94 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  Then, going out, they went though the region from village to village, making known the gospel and healing people in every place.\
	
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  Now Herod the farthing-ruler heard about everything that happened, and he was confused, since [it] was said by some that John was raised out of [the] dead, 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  but by others that Eliah had come, but by others that one among the ancient Prophets was raised. 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  Herod said: \'93John's head I cut off. Who, then, is this person of whom I hear such things?\'94 And he sought to see him.\
	\

\f1\i0 	
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre i aposteli nanwenner nyarnelte Y\'e9sun pa ilye cardaltar. T\'e1 talleset ar lende eressea n\'f3menna, ara osto estaina Vet-Saira.  
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Mal i \uc0\u351 angar, istala yanna lendes, hilyaner se. Ar camneset ar carampe t\'e9na pa Eruo aranie, ar nestanes i s\'e1mer maure nesti\'e9va. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  T\'e1, \'edre i aure n\'e1ne fif\'edrula, i yunque t\'faler senna ar quenter senna: \'93\'c1 menta i \uc0\u351 anga oa, menieltan mir i mastor ar restar *os vi, hirien n\'f3me lemien ar matso, an sisse nalve eressea n\'f3messe.\'94
\f0\b  13
\f1\b0  Mal quentes t\'e9na: \'93Elde \'e1ten anta nat matien.\'94 Quentelte: \'93Ualme same amba l\'e1 mastar lempe ar lingwe atta, qui l\'e1 c\'e9 menuvalme ar mancuvalme immen matso ilye sine quenin.\'94 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  An anelte *os neri h\'fami lempe. Mal quentes hildoryannar: \'93Tyara te caita undu mi hostar queniva *os *lepenquean mi ilya hosta.\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Ar carnelte sie ar tyarne te illi caita undu. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  T\'e1 nampes i mastar lempe ar lingwe atta ar yente mir menel, aistane tai ar rance tai, ar antanes tai i hildoin panien tai epe i \uc0\u351 anga. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Ar illi manter ar n\'e1ner qu\'e1tine, ar i lemyala rantar yar hostanelte quanter *vircolcar yunque.\

\f2\i\b \
10
\f3\b0  And when the apostles returned they told Jesus about all their deeds. Then he brought them and went to a lonely place, by a city called Bethsaida.
\f1\i0  
\f2\i\b 11
\f3\b0  But the crowds, knowing whither he went, followed him. And he received them and talked to them about God's kingdom, and he healed [those] who had need of healing. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  Then, when the day was fading, the twelve came to him and said to him: \'93Send the crowd away, for them to go into the villages and fields around us, to find a place to remain and food, for here we are in a lonely place.\'94 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  But he said to them: \'93\ul You\ulnone  give them something to eat.\'94 They said: \'93We do not have more than five breads and two fish, if perhaps we are not to go and trade to ourselves [= buy] food for all these people.\'94 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  For they were around five thousand people. But he said to his disciples: \'93Make them lie down in groups of people around fifty in each group.\'94 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  And they did so and made them all lie down. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  Then he took the five breads and two fish and looked into heaven, blessed them and broke them, and he gave them to the disciples to put them before the crowd. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  And all ate and were filled, and the remaining pieces that they gathered filled twelve baskets.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ar t\'fale, \'edre hyamnes n\'e1la erinqua, i ocomner senna i hildor, ar maquentes t\'e9na sie: \'93Man i \uc0\u351 angar quetir i nanye?\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse quentelte: \'93Yoh\'e1no i *Tumyando; hya exeli, El\'eda, hya exeli: i er i enwine Eruterc\'e1noron \'f3rie.\'94 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mal elde, man quetilde i nanye?\'94 Hanquentasse eque Peter: \'93Eruo Hristo!\'94 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  T\'e1 mi naraca quetie peantanes tien i \'e1valte quetumne sie aiquenna, 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  mal eques: \'93Mauya i Atanyondon mene ter rimbe perperi\'e9li ar n\'e1ve *auquerna lo i amy\'e1rar ar h\'e9re *airimor and parmagolmor, ar n\'e1ve nanca, ar i neldea auresse nauvas ortaina ama.\'94\
\
	
\f2\i\b 18
\f3\b0  And it happened [lit. came], when he prayed being alone, that the disciples assembled to him, and he asked them so: \'93Who do the crowds say that I am?\'94 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  In answer they said: \'93John the Baptist; or others: Elijah, or others: that one of the ancient prophets has risen.\'94 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93But you, who do you say that I am?\'94 In answer Peter said: \'93God's Christ!\'94 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  Then in harsh speech he instructed them that they were not to say so to anyone, 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  but he said: \'93It is necessary for the Son of Man to go through many sufferings and to be rejected [
\f2\b auquerna
\f3\b0 , turned away] the elders and chief priests and scribes, and to be slain, and on the third day he will be raised up.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes: \'93Qui aiquen mere tule apa ni, mauya sen v\'e1quete insen ar orta tarwerya ilya auresse ar hilya n\'ed. 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  An aiquen ye mere rehta cuilerya, sen nauvas vanwa, mal aiquen yeo cuile n\'e1 vanwa m\'e1rienyan, s\'e9 rehtuva sa. 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  \'c9 manen n\'e1 a\uc0\u351 ea atanen qui \'f1etis i quanda mar, mal v\'e9ra quenerya n\'e1 sen vanwa hya nancarna? 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  An aiquen ye n\'e1 *naityana inyenen ar quettanyanen, s\'e9nen i Atanyondo nauva *naityana \'edre tuluvas alcareryasse ar m\'ed Ataro ar i airi valion alcar. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Mal quetin lenna nanwiesse: Ear quelli i tarir sisse i uar tyavuva qualme n\'f3 cenuvalte Eruo aranie.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 23 
\f3\b0 Then he said: \'93If anyone wants to come after me, it is necessary for him to deny himself and lift [up] his cross every day and follow me. 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  For anyone who wishes to save his life, to him it will be lost, but anyone whose life is lost for my good, he will save it. 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  Indeed how is [it] beneficial to a man if he obtains the whole world, but his own person is lost or destroyed to him? 
\f2\b 26 
\f3\b0 For anyone who is ashamed over [-
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] me and over my word, over him the Son of Man will be ashamed when he shall come in his glory and in the Father's and the holy angels' glory. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  But I say to you in truth: [There] are some that stand here that will not taste death before they will see God's kingdom.\'94\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  T\'fale apa quettar sine, apa auri tolto, i talles P\'e9ter ar Yoh\'e1no ar Y\'e1cov ar lende ama mir i oron hyamien. 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Ar hyamieryasse cendeleryo ilce ahyane, ar lanneryar mirilyaner ninquissenen. 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! n\'e9r atta carampet \'f3se, yet n\'e1net M\'f3ses ar El\'eda. 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Tannette *intu alcaresse ar quenter pa i autie ya telyumnes Yer\'fasalemesse. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Ono P\'e9ter ar i enger \'f3se n\'e1ner lunge h\'famenen; mal apa coivie cennelte alcarerya ar i n\'e9r atta t\'e1ra \'f3se. 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre t\'fa oantet sello, P\'e9ter quente Y\'e9sunna: \'93*Peantar, m\'e1ra n\'e1 i nalme sisse. Etta alme orta *lancoar nelde, er elyen ar er M\'f3sen ar er El\'edan\'94 \'96 an uas sinte ya quentes. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre quentes nati sine enge lumbo ya teltane te, ar anelte ruhtaine \'edre mennelte mir i lumbo. 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Ar \'f3ma t\'fale et i lumbullo, qu\'e9tala: \'93Si n\'e1 yondonya, ye anaie c\'edlina. \'c1 lasta senna!\'94 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Ar apa i \'f3ma t\'fale, Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne h\'edrina erinqua. Mal anelte quilde ar uar nyarne aiquenen yane auressen pa i nati yar cennelte.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 28
\f3\b0  It happened [lit. came] after these words, after eight days, that he brought Peter and John and Jacob and went up into the mountain to pray. 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  And as he was praying [lit. in his praying] the appearance of his face changed, and his clothes glittered with whiteness. 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  And behold! two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elijah. 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  They showed themselves [dual] in glory and spoke about the going away that he was to complete in Jerusalem. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  But Peter and those that were with him were heavy with sleep; but after awakening they saw his glory and the two men standing with him. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  And when they [dual] went away from him, Peter said to Jesus: \'93Teacher, it is good that we are here. Therefore let us erect [
\f2\b orta
\f3\b0  = raise] three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah\'94 \'96 for he did not know what he said. 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  But when he said these things [there] was a cloud that overshadowed them, and they were terrified when they went into the cloud. 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  And a voice came out of the cloud, saying: \'93This is my son, who has been chosen. Listen to him!\'94 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  And after the voice came, Jesus was found [to be] alone. But they were silent and did not tell anyone in those days about the things that they saw.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  I hilyala auresse, \'edre t\'falelte undu i orontello, hoa \uc0\u351 anga velle se. 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! n\'e9r y\'e1me et i \uc0\u351 angallo, qu\'e9tala: \'93*Peantear, iquin lyello i cenil yondonyanna, an n\'e1se erya h\'ednanya, 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  ar y\'e9! rauco mapa se, ar rincenen yamis, ar tyarises rihta ar falasta, ar urdave autas sello apa harnie se. 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Ar inquen hildolyallon i et-hatumner i rauco, mal ua ence tien.\'94 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente: \'93A \'favoronda ar r\'edcina *n\'f3nare, manen andave mauyuva nin lemya aselde ar cole le? \'c1 tulya yondolya sir!\'94 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre en anes t\'falala hare, i rauco hante se i talamenna ar tyarne se rihta. Ono Y\'e9sus naityane i \'fapoica faire ar nestane i seldo ar se-antane ataryan. 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  Ar illi n\'e1ner elmendasse pa Eruo meletya t\'fare.\
\

\f2\i\b 37
\f3\b0  On the following day, when they came down from the mountain, a big crowd met him. 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  And behold! a man cried out of the crowd, saying: \'93Teacher, I beg of you that you see to my son, for he is my only child, 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  and behold! a demon seizes him, and suddenly [
\f2\b rincenen
\f3\b0 : with a sudden twist] he cries [out], and it causes him to twitch and foam, and it hardly goes away from him after wounding him. 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  And I begged of your disciples that they would expel the demon, but [it] was not possible for them.\'94 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said: \'93O unfaithful and twisted generation, how long will it be necessary for me to remain with you and to bear you? Lead your son hither!\'94 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  But when he was still coming near, the demon threw him to the ground and caused him to twitch. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed the boy and gave him to his father. 
\f2\b 43
\f3\b0  And all were in wonder about God's majestic power.\
\

\f1\i0 	S\'ed \'edre anelte mapaine elmendanen pa ilye i nati yar carnes, quentes hildoryannar: 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  \'93Oi hepa quettar sine s\'e1masse, an i Atanyondo nauva antaina olla mannar atanion.\'94 
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  Mal ualte hanyane quetie sina; anes nurtaina tello, pustien te tuntiello mana tenges, ar runcelte maquetiello senna pa quetie sina.\
	
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  T\'e1 enge cos mici te pa man n\'e1ne i ant\'fara mici te. 
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus, istala manen sannelte endaltasse, nampe h\'edna ar panyane se ara inse 
\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  ar quente t\'e9na: \'93Aiquen ye came h\'edna sina essenyasse came n\'ed, ar aiquen ye came n\'ed came ye ni-mentane. I ampitya mici le n\'e1 i ant\'fara.\'94 \
	
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse eque Yoh\'e1no: \'93*Peantar, cennelme n\'e9r et-h\'e1ta raucor esselyanen, ar n\'e9velme pusta se, pan \'fanes aselme.\'94 
\f0\b 50
\f1\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93\'c1vase pusta, an ye ua tare lenna n\'e1 elden!\'94\
\
	
\f3\i Now when they were seized by wonder about all the things that he did, he said to his disciples: 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  \'93Always keep these words in mind, for the Son of Man will be given over into the hands of men.\'94 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  But they did not understand this saying; it was hidden from them, to stop them for perceiving was it meant, and they were afraid to ask [Q: feared from asking] him about this saying. \
	
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  Then [there] was a strife among them about who was the greatest among them. 
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  Jesus, knowing how they thought in their heart, took a child and put it next to himself 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  and said to them: \'93Anyone who receives this child in my name receives me, and anyone who receives me receives the one who sent me. The smallest [one] among you is the greatest.\'94\
	
\f2\b 49
\f3\b0  In answer John said: \'93Teacher, we saw a man expelling demons by your name, and we tried to stop him, since he was not with us.\'94 
\f2\b 50
\f3\b0  But Jeus said to him: \'93Do not stop him, for [he] that does not stand against you is for you!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 51
\f1\b0  S\'ed \'edre i l\'fame t\'fale hare n\'e1veryan c\'e1mina ama, quernes cendelerya Yer\'fasalemanna menien tar. 
\f0\b 52
\f1\b0  Mentanes terc\'e1noli epe inse, ar oantelte ar lender mir masto Sam\'e1reaiva, manwien sen. 
\f0\b 53
\f1\b0  Mal ualte merne camitas, pan anes malleryasse Yer\'fasalemenna. 
\f0\b 54
\f1\b0  \'cdre i hildor Y\'e1cov yo Yoh\'e1no cennet ta, quentette: \'93Heru, ma meril i canuvalve n\'e1ren tule undu menello nancarien te?\'94 
\f0\b 55
\f1\b0  Mal quernes inse ar tu-naityane. 
\f0\b 56
\f1\b0  T\'e1 lendelte hyana mastonna.\
\

\f2\i\b 51
\f3\b0  Now when the time came near for his being received up, he turned his face towards Jerusalem to go there. 
\f2\b 52
\f3\b0  He sent heralds before himself, and they went away and went into a village of [the] Samaritans, to prepare for him. 
\f2\b 53
\f3\b0  But they did not want to receive him, since he was on his way to Jerusalem. 
\f2\b 54
\f3\b0  When the disciples Jacob and John saw [dual] that, they [dual] said: \'93Lord, do you wish that we are to command fire to come down from heaven to destroy them?\'94 
\f2\b 55
\f3\b0  But he turned himself and rebuked them [dual]. 
\f2\b 56
\f3\b0  Then he went away to another village.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 57
\f1\b0  \'cdre lendelte i mallesse qu\'e9n quente senna: \'93Hilyuvan lye ilya n\'f3menna yanna autal.\'94 
\f0\b 58
\f1\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Rusqui samir eccar ar menelo aiwi samir *haustar, mal i Atanyondo ua same n\'f3me panien carya.\'94 \
\

\f2\i\b 57
\f3\b0  When they went on the way a person said to him: \'93I will follow you to every place that you go away to.\'94 
\f2\b 58
\f3\b0  And Jesus said to him: \'93Foxes have holes [or, dens/lairs] and the birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of Man does not have [any] place to put his head.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 59
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes hyana nerenna: \'93\'c1ni hilya!\'94 I n\'e9r quente: \'93Lava nin minyave auta ar tala atarinya i sapsanna.\'94 
\f0\b 60
\f1\b0  Mal quentes senna: \'93Lava qualinin tala qualiniltar i sapsanna, mal elye mena ar cara menelo aranie sinwa!\'94 
\f0\b 61
\f1\b0  Ar exe quente: \'93Hilyuvan lye, Heru, mal minyave lava nin quete nam\'e1rie innar ear coanyasse.\'94 
\f0\b 62
\f1\b0  Ono Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93*\'daqu\'e9n ye ap\'e1nie m\'e1rya i hyaresse ar y\'e9ta i nati yar caita ca se, n\'e1 m\'e1ra Eruo aranien. \
\

\f2\i\b 59
\f3\b0  Then he said to another man: \'93Follow me!\'94 The man said: \'93Allow me first to go away and bring my father to the grave.\'94 
\f2\b 60
\f3\b0  But he said to him: \'93Let [the] dead bring their dead to the grave, but you go and make the kingdom of heaven known!\'94 
\f2\b 61
\f3\b0  And another said: \'93I will follow you, Lord, but first let me say farewell to [those] that are in my house.\'94 
\f2\b 62
\f3\b0  But Jesus said to him: \'93Nobody who has put his hand on the plough and looks at the things that lie behind him, is fit for God's kingdom.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 10\

\f1\b0 Apa nati sine i Heru cille exi *otoquean ar etementane te atta ar atta epe inse, ilya mastonna yanna s\'e9 immo tulumne. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93I yavie n\'e1 \'favea, mal i molir nar mance. Etta \'e1 arca i yavi\'e9no Herullo, mentieryan queni hostien yavierya. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  \'c1 etelelya! Y\'e9! Mentan le ve euler mici \'f1armor. 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  \'c1va cole *pocolle, hya poco matson, hya hyapat; ar \'e1va *suila aiquen i mallesse. 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  \'cdre tulilde mir coa, minyave queta: 'Nai coa sina samuva raine!' 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Ar qui ea tasse meldo raineo, rainelda seruva senna. Mal qui ua ea er, nanwenuvas lenna. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Etta \'e1 lemya coa tanasse, m\'e1tala ar s\'facala i nati yar antalte len, an ye mole n\'e1 valda *paityaleryo. \'c1va leve coallo coanna.\
	
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Ente, \'edre menilde mir osto ar camilde le, mata i nati panyaine epe le, 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  ar \'e1 nesta i hlaiwar sasse, ar nyara tien: 'Eruo aranie ut\'falie hare lenna.' 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Mal quiquie tulilde mir osto ar ualte came le, mena mir palle malleryar ar queta: 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  'Yando i asto ya himyane talulmanta ostoldallo palalme oa lenna. Ono nat sina alde ista, i ut\'falie hare Eruo aranie!' 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Nyarin lenna: Soromen i aure nami\'e9va nauva *c\'f3lima l\'e1 ya nauvas sana oston.\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 10\

\f3\b0 After these things the Lord chose seventy others and sent them forth two and two before himself, to every village that he himself would come to. 2 He said to them: \'93The harvest is abundant, but those who work are few. Therefore ask of the Lord of the harvest, for him to send people to gather his harvest. 3 Go out! Behold! I send you like lambs among wolves. 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  Do not carry a pouch, or a bag for food, or a pair of shoes; and do not greet anyone on the road. 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  When you come into a house, first say: 'May this house have peace!' 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  And if [there] is there a friend of peace, your peace will rest upon him. But if [there] is not one, it will return to you. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  Therefore remain in that house, eating and drinking the things that they give you, for [he] who works is worthy of his reward. Do not move from house to house. \
	
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  Furthermore, when you go into a city and they receive you, eat the things put before you, 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  and heal the sick ones in it, and tell them: 'God's kingdom has come near to you.' 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  But whenever you come into a city and they do not receive you, go into their broad ways and say: 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  'Also [/even] the dust which stuck to our feet [dual] from your city we shake away to you. But this thing you are to know, that God's kingdom has come near!' I tell you: To Sodom the day of judgement will be more bearable than what it will be to that city.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Horro lyen, Corasin! Horro lyen, Vet-Saira! An qui i taure cardar yar amartier letse martaner mi T\'edr ar S\'edron, andan\'e9ya hirnelte inwis, h\'e1mala mi *fillanne ar *litte. 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Etta T\'edren ar S\'edronen i namie nauva *c\'f3lima l\'e1 lent! 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Ar elye, Capernaum, ma c\'e9 nauval ortaina menelenna? Undu Mandostonna tuluval! \
	
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ye lasta lenna lasta ninna. Ar ye loita cime l\'e9, loita cime n\'ed. Ente, ye loita cime n\'ed, loita cime ye ni-mentane.\'94\
	
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  T\'e1 i *otoquean nanwenner mi alasse, qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, yando i raucoin mauya cime canwalmar mi esselya!\'94 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93Cennen S\'e1tan lantienwa ve \'edta et menello. 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Y\'e9! \'c1nien len i t\'fare *vettien nu taluldat leucar ar *nastaror ar i quanda melehte i \'f1ottova, ar munta pole harna le. 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Mal \'e1va same alasse pa turielda or i raucor, mal sama alasse pan esseldar anaier t\'e9cine menelde.\'94\
\
	
\f2\i\b 13
\f3\b0  Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty deeds that have happened in you [dual] happened in Tyre and Sidon, long ago they found repentence, sitting in sack and ash. 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  Therefore for Tyre and to Sodom the judgement will be more bearable than for you! [dual] 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  And you, Capernaum, will you perhaps be raised up to heaven? Down to Mandos [Hades] you will come!\
	
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  [He] who listens to you listens to me. And [he] who fails to heed you, fails to heed me. Therefore, [he] who fails to heed me, fails to heed [the one] who sent me.\'94\
	
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  Then the seventy returned with [lit. in] joy, saying: \'93Lord, also [/even] for the demons it is necessary to heed our orders in your name!\'94  
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93I saw Satan fallen like a flash out of heaven. 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  Behold! I have given you the power to trample under your feet serpents and scorpions and the entire might of the enemy, and nothing can wound you. But do not have joy about your control over the demons, but have joy since your names have been written in heaven.\'94\

\f1\i0 \
 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  L\'fame yanasse anes anvalima i Aire Feanen ar quente: \'93Laitan tye, Atar, Heru or menel cemenye, an unurtiel nati sine sailallon ar handallon, ar \'e1pantiel tai lapsin. N\'e1, \'c1tar, an carie sie n\'e1ne m\'e1ra hendulyatse. 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Ilye nati anaier antaine olla nin lo Atarinya, ar man i Yondo n\'e1 *\'faquen ista hequa i Atar, ar man i Atar n\'e1, *\'faquen ista hequa i Yondo, ar aiquen yen i Yondo mere apanta se.\'94\
	
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Ar apa querie inse i hildonnar quentes: \'93Valime n\'e1t i hendu yat y\'e9tat yar elde y\'e9tar. 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  An quetin lenna: Rimbe Eruterc\'e1noli ar aralli merner cene i nati yar elde y\'e9tar, mal ualte cenne tai, ar hlare i nati yar elde hlarir, mal ualte hlasse tai.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 21
\f3\b0  At that time he was most happy by the Holy Spirit and said: \'93I praise you, Father, Lord over heaven and earth, for you have hidden these things from wise ones and from intelligent ones, and you have revealed them to babes. Yes, Father, for doing so was good in your eyes. 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  All things have been given over to me by my Father, and who the Son is nobody knows except the Father, and who the Father is, nobody knows except the Son, and anyone to whom the Son wishes to reveal him.\'94\
	
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  And after turning [Q: turning himself] towards the disciples he said: \'93Happy are the eyes [dual] that behold [the things] \ul you\ulnone  behold. 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  For I say to you: Numerous prophets and kings wished to see the things that you behold, but they did not see them, and hear the things that you hear, but they did not hear them.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! \uc0\u351 anyengolmo oronte, tyastien se, ar eques: \'93*Peantar, mana caruvan n\'e1ven aryon oira coivi\'e9no?\'94 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Quentes senna: \'93Mana t\'e9cina i \cf2 \uc0\u350 anyesse? Manen hental?\'94 
\f0\b 27 
\f1\b0 Hanquentasse quentes: \'93Alye mele i H\'e9ru Ainolya quanda endalyanen ar quanda fealyanen ar quanda poldorelyanen ar quanda s\'e1malyanen, ar armarolya ve imle.\'94 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Hanquentes mai; cara sie ar samuval coivie.\'94\
	
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Mal s\'e9, m\'e9rala tana i anes faila, quente Y\'e9sunna: \'93Ar man n\'e1 armaronya?\'94 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente: \'93N\'e9r lelyala undu Yer\'fasalemello Yericonna lantane mici piluli, i namper lanneryar ar se-palpaner, se-hehtala imbe coive ar qualme. 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Ve martane, *airimo lende undu sana mallesse, mal \'edre se-cennes, langanes i hyana r\'edmasse i malleo. \
\

\f2\i\b 25
\f3\b0  And behold! a scribe arose, to test him, and he said: \'93Teacher, what am I to do to be heir of eternal life?\'94 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  He said to him: \'93What is written in the Law? How do you read?\'94 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  In answer he said: \'93You are to love the Lord your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole strenght and your whole mind, and your neighbor as yourself.\'94 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  Jesus said to him: \'93You answered well; do so and you will have life.\'94\
	
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  But he, wishing to show that he was just, said to Jesus: \'93And who is my neighbor?\'94 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said: \'93A man going down from Jerusalem to Jericho fell among robbers, that took his clothes and beat him, abandoning him between life and death. 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  As [it] happened, a priest went down on that road, but when he saw him, he passed by in the other edge of the road.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b \cf0 32
\f1\b0  M\'ed imya l\'e9 yando Lev\'edon, \'edre t\'fales undu i n\'f3menna ar cenne se, langane oa sello. 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Mal Sam\'e1rea n\'e9r lelyala i mallesse t\'fale senna, ar \'edre cenneses, endarya etelende senna. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  T\'fales hare senna ar vaitane nahteryar, ulyala millo ar limpe or tai. T\'e1 se-panyanes celvaryasse ar talle se *sendassenna ar cimne maureryar. 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Ar i hilyala auresse nampes \ul len\'e1r\ulnone  atta, antane tu i turcon i *sendasseo, ar quente: 'Cima maureryar, ar *aiqua ya *yuhtal han si, inye *nampaityuva lyen \'edre nanwenuvan sir.'\

\f0\b 	36 
\f1\b0 Man mici nelde sine sanal carne inse armaro i neren ye lantane im\'edca i pilur?\'94 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Eques: \'93Ye or\'e1ve sesse.\'94 Y\'e9sus t\'e1 quente senna: \'93Alye mene ar care i imya nat.\'94\
	\

\f2\i\b 38
\f3\b0  In the same manner also a Levite, when he came down to the place and saw him, passed by away from him. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  But a Samaritan man travelling on the road came to him, and when he saw him, his heart went out to him. 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  He came near to him and wrapped his wounds, pouring oil and wine over them. Then he placed him on his animal and brought him to an inn and heeded his needs. 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  And on the following day he took two denarii, gave them [dual] to the chief of the inn, and said: 'Heed his needs, and anything that you use beyond this, I will pay you back when I shall return hither.'\
	
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  Who among these three do you think made himself a neighbor to the man who fell among the robbers?\'94 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  He said: \'93[He] who had mercy on him.\'94 Jesus thens said to him: \'93You go and do the same thing.\'94\
	\

\f0\i0\b 38
\f1\b0  S\'ed \'edre oantelte lendes mir masto. Sisse n\'eds estaina Mar\uc0\u351 a camne se mir coarya. 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Enge as n\'eds sina n\'e9\uc0\u351 a yeo esse n\'e1ne Mar\'eda, ye hamne undu ara i Heruo talu ar lastane quettaryanna. 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Mal Mar\uc0\u351 a s\'e1me m\'e1ryat quante olya moli\'e9nen, ar t\'fales ar quente: \'93Heru, ma ua valda lyen i n\'e9\u351 anya ni-ehehtie erinqua molienyasse? Etta queta senna i mauya sen manya ni.\'94 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse i Heru quente senna: \'93Mar\uc0\u351 a, Mar\u351 a, samil qu\'e1rele ar nalye *tarastaina pa rimbe natali. 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Mal erya natwa ea maure. Mar\'eda ic\'edlie i m\'e1ra ranta, ar s\'e1 ua nauva mapaina sello.\'94\

\f2\i\b \
38
\f3\b0  Now when they went away he went into a city. Here a woman called Martha received him into her house. 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  [There] was with this woman a sister whose name was Mary, who sat down by the feet of the Lord and listened to his word. 
\f2\b 40 
\f3\b0 But Martha had her hands full with much work, and she came and said: \'93Lord, is it not important to you that my sister has left me alone in my work? Therefore say to her that it is necessary for her to help me.\'94 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  In answer the Lord said to her: \'93Martha, Martha, you have anxiety and you are troubled about numerous things. 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  But of a single thing [there] is need. Mary has chosen the good part, and it will not be taken from her.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 11\

\f1\b0 Ar t\'fale, \'edre enges n\'f3messe hy\'e1mala, i \'edre pustanes qu\'e9n hildoryaron quente senna: \'93Heru, \'e1men peanta hyame, ve Yoh\'e1no yando peantane hildoryain.\'94\
	
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93Quiquie hyamilde, queta: Atar, na aire esselya. Aranielya na tuluva. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  \'c1men anta ilaurea massalma aure apa aure, 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  ar \'e1men apsene \'facarelmar, an yando elme apsenir ilquenen ye same rohta men; ar \'e1vame tulya \'fa\uc0\u351 ahtienna.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 11\

\f3\b0 And it happened [lit. came], when he was in a place praying, that when he stopped one of his disciples said to him: \'93Lord, teach us [how] to pray, like John also taught his disciples.\'94\
	
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93Whenever you pray, say: Father, let your name be holy. Let your kingdom come. Give us our daily bread day after day, 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  and forgive us our sins, for also we forgive everyone who has a debt to us; and do not lead us into temptation.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Man mici le ye same meldo lelyuva senna endesse i l\'f3mio ar quetuva senna: 'Meldo, \'e1ni *yutya massainen nelde, 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  an meldo ninya ut\'falie ninna lendallo ar samin munta panien epe se'? 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Ar s\'e9 i mityallo quete hanquentasse: '\'c1vani *tarasta! I fenna n\'e1 pahta, ar h\'ednanyar nar asinye i caimasse; ua ece nin orta antien lyen.' 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Quetin lenna: Qui uas orta ar anta sen pan n\'e1se meldorya, \'e9 ortuvas ar antuva sen vorongandeleryanen. 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Etta quetin lenna: \'c1 arca, ar nauva len antaina; \'e1 cesta, ar hiruvalde; \'e1 tamba, ar nauva len latyaina. 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  An ilquen arcala came, ar ilquen cestala hire, ar ilquenen tambala nauva latyaina.\
\

\f2\i\b 5
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93Who among you that has a friend will go to him in the midst of the night and will say to him: 'Friend, loan me three loaves, 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey and I have nothing to put before him'? 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  And he from the inside says in answer: 'Do not trouble me! The door is shut, and my children are with me in the bed; it is not possible for me to rise to give you [anything].' 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  I say to you: If he does not rise and give to him since he is his friend, indeed he will rise and give to him because of his persistence [
\f2\b vorongandele
\f3\b0 ]. 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  Therefore I say to you: Ask, and [it] will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you. 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking [it] will be opened.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Lau ea atar mici le ye, qui yondorya arca lingwe, c\'e9 antuva sen leuca mende lingwio? 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Hya qui yando arcas ohte, lau antuvas sen *nestaro? 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Etta, qui elde i nar olce istar anta m\'e1re annar h\'ednaldain, manen ole i menelda Atar antuva Aire Fea in arcar sello!\'94\
	
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Ar et-hantes \'fapa rauco. Apa i rauco ett\'fale, i \'fapa n\'e9r carampe. Ar i \uc0\u351 angar n\'e1ner elmendasse. 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Mal quelli mici te quenter: \'93Et-hatis i raucor turconen i raucoron, V\'e9lsevul.\'94 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ono exeli, tyastien se, cestaner sello tanwa et menello. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Istala s\'edmaltar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Ilya aranie \uc0\u351 anca insanna n\'e1 nancarna, ar m\'e1r \u351 anca insanna lanta. 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Mal qui yando S\'e1tan n\'e1 \uc0\u351 anca insenna, manen aranierya taruva? An quetilde i et-hatin i raucor V\'e9lsev\'falo t\'farenen.\
\

\f2\i\b 11
\f3\b0  Surely [there] is not [any] father among you who, if his son asks for a fish, will perhaps give him a serpent instead of a fish? 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  Or if he also asks for an egg, surely he will not give him a scorpion? 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  Therefore, if you that are wicked know [how] to give good gifts to your children, how [much] more the heavenly Father will give Holy Spirit to those that ask of him!\'94\
	
\f2\b 14 
\f3\b0 And he expelled a dumb demon. After the demon came out, the dumb man spoke. And the crowds were in wonder. 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  But some among them said: \'93He expels the demons by the chief of of the demons, Belzebul.\'94 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  But others, in order to test him, sought from him a sign out of heaven. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  Knowing their imaginations he said to them: \'93Every kingdom split against itself is undone, and a home split against itself falls. 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  But if also [/even] Satan is split against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that I expel the demons by Belzebub's power.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Qui t\'farenen V\'e9lsev\'falo et-hatin raucor, mannen yondolyar et-hatir te? Sina castanen nauvalte n\'e1moldar. 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Mal qui Eruo lepernen et-hatin i raucor, Eruo aranie \'e9 ut\'falie lenna. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  \'cdre polda n\'e9r, arwa carmaron, varya v\'e9ra pacarya, armaryar nar rainesse. 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre n\'e9r polda l\'e1 s\'e9 tule ar *orture se, mapas oa i carmar ya i exe sanne antumner sen varnasse, ar etsatis i nati yar p\'edles sello. 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Ye ua asinye tare ninna, ar ye ua hosta, vinta.\
	
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  \'cdre \'fapoica faire tule et nerello, langas ter parce m\'e9nar cestala n\'f3me s\'e9reva, ar \'edre uas hire, quetis: 'Nanwenuvan coanyanna yallo l\'e9ven.' 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre tulis, hiris sa carna poica ar netyaina. 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  T\'e1 autas ar tala \'f3se hyane fairi otso, olce l\'e1 inse, ar apa tulilte minna marilte tasse, ar tana neren i m\'e9tima s\'f3ma nauva ulca l\'e1 i minya.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 19
\f3\b0  If by the power of Beelsebul I throw out demons, by whom do your sons throw them out? For this reason they will be your judges. 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  But if by God's finger I throw the demons out, God's kingdom has indeed come to you. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  When a strong man, having weapons, protects his own court, his goods are [left] in peace. 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  But when a man stronger than him comes and overpowers him, he takes away the weapons which the other thought were going to give him security, and he distributes the things that he stole from him. 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  [He] who is not with me stands against me, and [he] who does not gather, scatters.\
	
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through try regions seeking a place of rest, and when it does not find one, it says: 'I will return to my house from which I moved.' 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  And when it comes, it finds it made clean and adorned. 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  Then it goes away and brings with it seven other spirits, more wicked then itself, and after they come in they dwell there, and to that man the last state will be worse than the first.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 	27
\f1\b0  S\'ed \'edre s\'e9 n\'e1ne qu\'e9tala nati sine, n\'eds et i \uc0\u351 angallo ortane \'f3marya ar quente senna: \'93Valime i s\'fama ya lye-colle ar i i tyetsu yalto anel ty\'e9tina!\'94 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Mal eques: \'93Arya n\'e1 qui quetil: Valime nar i hlarir Eruo quetta ar hepir sa!\'94\
	
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  \'cdre i \uc0\u351 angar ocomner, quentes: \'93*N\'f3nare sina n\'e1 ulca *n\'f3nare! Arcas tanwar, mal tanwa ua nauva antaina san, hequa Y\'f3no tanwa. 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  An ve Y\'f3na n\'e1ne carna tanwa i lien Ninevesse, sie yando i Atanyondo nauva tanwa *n\'f3nare sinan. 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Hyarmeno t\'e1ri nauva ortaina i namiesse as i queni *n\'f3nare sino ar namuva te ulce, an t\'fales cemeno mettallo hlarien Solomondo sailie \'96  ar y\'e9, sisse ea amba l\'e1 Solomon! 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  I queni Ninevello ortuvar i namiesse as *n\'f3nare sina ar namuva sa ulca. An hirnelte inwis Y\'f3no *nyardi\'e9nen, ar y\'e9, sisse ea amba l\'e1 Y\'f3na!\
\

\f2\i\b 	27
\f3\b0  Now when he was saying these things, a woman out of the crowd raised her voice and said to him: \'93Happy the womb that bore you and the teats [dual] from which you were suckled!\'94 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  But he said: \'93[It] is better if you say: Happy are [those] that hear God's word and keep it!\'94\
	
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  When the crowds gathered, he said: \'93This generation is an evil generation. It asks for signs, but a sign will not be given to it, except the sign of Jonah. 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  For like Jonah was made a sign to the people in Nineveh, so also the Son of Man will be a sign to this generation. 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  The queen of the south will be raised in the judgement with this generation and will judge them evil, for she came from the end of the earth to hear Solomon's wisdom, and behold, here is [something] more than Solomon. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  The people from Niniveh will rise in the judgement with this generation and will judge it evil. For they found repentence at [-
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] the preaching of Jonah, and behold, here is [something] more than Jonah!\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Apa nartie calma, mo ua panya sa cambosse hya nu lestacolca, mal i calmatarmasse, l\'e1vala in tulir minna cene i cala. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  I hroan, i calma n\'e1 hendelya. \'cdre heldenya n\'e1 m\'e1lesse, quanda hroalya n\'e1 yando calima, mal \'edre nas olca, hroalya n\'e1 yando morna. 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Etta cima i sana cala ya ea lyesse ua mornie! 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Sie, qui quanda hroalya n\'e1 calyaina, l\'e1 arwa ranto ya n\'e1 morna, ilqua nauva calyaina ve \'edre i calma calya lye alcaryanen!\'94\
	
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Apa quentes ta, Farisa arcane i matumnes mat \'f3se. Etta lendes minna ar caine undu ara i sarno. 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Mal i Farisa n\'e1ne elmendasse \'edre cennes i uas minyave sove inse n\'f3 i mat. 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Mal i Heru quente senna: \'93S\'ed, a Farisar! Poitalde i ette i yulmo ar veneo, mal mityaldasse nalde quante pilweo ar olci\'e9no. \
\

\f2\i\b 33
\f3\b0  After lighting a lamp, one does not put it in a vault or under a measuring basket, but on the lampstand, allowing those that come in to see the light. 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  To the body, the lamp is your eye. When your eye is in health, your entire body is also bright, but when it is evil, your body is also dark. 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  Therefore take heed that that light which is in you is not darkness! 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  Thus, if your entire body is illuminated, not having [any] part which is dark, everything will be illuminated as when the lamp illumulates you with its ray!\'94\
	
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  After he said that, a Pharisee requested that he would eat a meal with him. Therefore he went inside and lay down at the table. 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  But the Pharisee was in wonder when he saw that he did not first wash himself before the meal. 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  But the Lord said to him: \'93Now, O Pharisees! You cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but in the inside of you you are full of theft and wickedness!\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  \'dahandar! Ye ontane i ette, ma uas ontane yando i mitya? 
\f0\b 41 
\f1\b0 Mal \'e1 anta annar penyain et yallo ea mityaldasse, ar y\'e9! ilqua nauva poica len. 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Mal horro len, a Farisar, pan antalde i quaista ranta i \ul minto
\f3\i \ulnone  
\f1\i0 ar i *laiquelisso ar ilya queo, mal langalde i failie ar i melme Eruva! Nati sine mauyaner len care, \'fa lengi\'e9no i exi. 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Horro len, a Farisar, an melilde same i minde sondar i *yomencoassen ar came i *suilier m\'ed mancalen\'f3mi. 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  Horro len, an nalde ve i noiri yar uar a\uc0\u351 c\'e9nime, ty\'e1rala queni vanta olla tai \'fa isti\'e9no.\'94\
	
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse qu\'e9n im\'edca i \uc0\u351 anyengolmor quente senna: \'93*Peantar, queti\'e9nen nati sine antal ulca esse yando elmen.\'94 
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes: \'93Horro yando len i nar \uc0\u351 anyengolmor, an panyalde atanissen c\'f3lor urde colien, mal elde uar appa i c\'f3lar eryanen leperildaron! \
\

\f2\i\b 40
\f3\b0  Senseless ones! [He] who created the outside, did he not also create the inside? 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  But give gifts to poor ones out of [that] which is in your inside, and behold! everything will be clean to you. 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  But woe to you, o Pharisees, since you give the tenth part of the mint and of the rue and of every vegetable, but you pass over the justice and the love for God! These things were necessary for you to do, without passing over the others. 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  Woe to you, o Pharisees, since you love to have the prominent seats in the synagoges and to receive the greatings in the market places. 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  Woe to you, for you are like the tombs that are not easy to see, causing people to walk over them without knowing.\'94\
	
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  In answer one among the lawyers said to him: \'93Teacher, by saying these things you give an evil name also to us.\'94 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  Then he said: \'93Woe also to you who are lawyers, for you put on men burders hard to bear, but you do not touch the burdens with a single one of your fingers!\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  Horro len, an carastalde i noiri i Eruterc\'e1noin, mal atarildar nacanter te! 
\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  \'c9 nalde astarmor ar sanar mai pa atarildaron cardar, an t\'e9 necanter i Eruterc\'e1nor, mal elde carastar noiriltar! 
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  Sina castanen Eruo sailie quente: Mentuvan t\'e9na Eruterc\'e1nor ar aposteli, ar nahtuvalte ar roituvalte quelli mici te, 
\f0\b 50 
\f1\b0 ar sie ilye i Eruterc\'e1noron serce ya anaie ulyaina i mardo tulciello tenna s\'ed nauva c\'e1nina n\'f3nare sinallo, 
\f0\b 51
\f1\b0  sercello \'c1velo tenna serce Secar\'edo, ye n\'e1ne nanca imbi i *yangwe ar i coa. N\'e1, nyarin len, nauvas c\'e1nina *n\'f3nare sinallo!\
	
\f0\b 52
\f1\b0  Horro len i nar \uc0\u351 anyengolmor, an am\'e1pielde oa i *latil istyava; elde uar lende minna, ar i merner lelya minna pustanelde!\'94\
	
\f0\b 53
\f1\b0  \'cdre etelendes talo i parmangolmor ar i Farisar *yestaner nire senna aicave ar ulya senna maqueti\'e9li pa hyane natali, 
\f0\b 54
\f1\b0  se-t\'edrala mapien nat et antoryallo.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 47
\f3\b0  Woe to you, for you build the tombs for the prophets, but your fathers killed them! 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  Indeed you are witnesses and think well of the deeds of your fathers, for \ul they\ulnone  killed the prophets, but you build their tombs! 
\f2\b 49
\f3\b0  For this reason God's wisdom said: I will send to them prophets and apostles, and they will kill and they will persecute some among them, 
\f2\b 50
\f3\b0  and so the blood of all the prophets that has been poured [out] from the foundation of the world until now will be demanded from this generation, 
\f2\b 51
\f3\b0  from the blood of Abel until the blood of Zechariah, who was slain between the altar and the house. Yes, I tell you, it will be demanded from this generation!\
	
\f2\b 52
\f3\b0  Woe to you that are scribes, for you have taken away the key of knowledge; you did not go inside, and [those] who wished to go inside you stopped!\'94\
	
\f2\b 53
\f3\b0  When he went out from there the the scribes and the Pharisees started to press against him terribly and to pour upon him questions about other things, 
\f2\b 54
\f3\b0  watching him to seize something out of his mouth.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 12\

\f1\b0 L\'fame yanasse, \'edre i \uc0\u351 anga n\'e1ne oc\'f3mienwa mi *quaih\'fameli, ta rimbe i qu\'e9n *vattane i exe undu, *yestanes quete hildoryannar minyave: \'93Hepa inde oa i *pulmaxello i Fariryaron, y\'e1 *imnetie n\'e1. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Mal ea munta nurtaina ya ua nauva apantaina, hya nulda ya ua nauva sinwa. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Etta, ilye nati yar quetilde i morniesse nauvar hl\'e1rine i calasse, ar ya hlussalde v\'e9re \uc0\u351 amberyassen nauva carna sinwa i coaron t\'f3pallon. 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Ente, quetin lenna i nar meldonyar: \'c1va ruce illon nahtar i hroa ar epeta uar pole care amba. 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Mal tanuvan len manello mauya len ruce: Ruca yello apa nehtie same i t\'fare hati\'e9va mir Ehenna. N\'e1, quetin lenna, ruca sello!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 12\

\f3\b0 At that time, when the crowd had gathered in tens of thousands, so numerous that one trampled the other down, he began to say to his disciples first: \'93Keep yourselves away from the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  But [there] is nothing hidden that will not be revealed, or secret that will not be known. 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  Therefore, all things which you say in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you whisper in your own chambers will be made known from the roofs of the houses. 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  Moreover, I say to you that are my friends: Do not fear from [those] that kill the body and thereafter cannot do more. 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  But I will show you whom [Q: from whom] it is necessary for you to fear: Fear [him] who after killing has the power of throwing into Gehenna. Yes, I say to you, fear him!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Filit atta n\'e1t v\'e1cine mitta urusteva attan, l\'e1? Ananta Eru ua loita enyale er mici tu. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Mal yando careldo findi nar illi n\'f3tine. \'c1va ruce; nalde mirwe l\'e1 rimbe filici.\
	
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Mal quetin lenna: Ilquen ye *etequenta ni epe atani, s\'e9 i Atanyondo yando *etequentuva epe Eruo vali. 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Mal ye laquete ni epe atani nauva laqu\'e9tina epe Eruo vali. 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Ar ilquenen ye quete quetta i Atanyondonna, ta nauva aps\'e9nina, mal yen naiquete i Aire Feanna, ta ua nauva aps\'e9nina. 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre talalde le epe combi ar c\'e1nor ar t\'fari, \'e1va same qu\'e1rele pa manen hya mananen varyuvalde inde, hya pa mana quetuvalde; 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  an i Aire Fea peantuva l\'fame entasse pa i nati yar mauyar len quete.\'94\
\
	
\f2\i\b 6
\f3\b0  Two sparrows [
\f2\b filit
\f3\b0 : little bird] are [dual] sold for two copper pieces, no? And yet God does not fail to recall one among them [dual]. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  But also the hairs of your head are all counted. Do not fear; you are more precious than many sparrows.\
	
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  But I say to you: Everyone who confesses me before men, him the Son of Man will also confess before God's angels. 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  But [he] who denies me before men will be denied before God's angels. 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  And to everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man, that will be fogiven, but to [anyone] who blasphemes agaist the Holy Sprit, that will not be forgiven. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  But when they bring you before councils and governors and powers, do not have anxiety about how or with what you will defend yourselves, or about what you will say; 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that hour about the things that it is necessary for you to say.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  T\'e1 qu\'e9n i \uc0\u351 angasse quente senna: \'93*Peantar, queta h\'e1nonyanna i mauya sen anta nin masse i *aryoniesse!\'94 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Quentes senna: \'93A n\'e9r, man ni-panyane namien let hya etsatien lent *aryoniesta?\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93Cima ar \'e1 varya inde ilya milciello, an yando \'edre qu\'e9n same \'fave, coivierya ua tule armaryallon.\'94 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ente, quentes t\'e9na sestie, qu\'e9tala: \'93I n\'f3re l\'e1rea nerwa antane hoa y\'e1vie. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Ar carnes \'favie s\'e1maryasse, qu\'e9tala: 'Mana caruvan, s\'ed ire penin n\'f3me yasse polin hosta y\'e1vienya?' 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ar quentes: 'Caruvan sie: Nancaruvan hauranyar, ar carastuvan haurali hoe l\'e1 tai, ar tasse hostuvan ilya orenya ar ilye m\'e1re natinyar; 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  ar quetuvan imninna: 'S\'ed samil rimbe m\'e1re natali haurasse rimbe loalin. Sera, mata, suca, sama alasse!'\
\

\f2\i\b 13
\f3\b0  Then a person in the crowd said to him: \'93Teacher, say to my brother that [it] is necessary for him to give me a portion in the inheritance!\'94 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  He said to him: \'93O man, who put me [in a position] to judge you [dual] or to distribute to you [dual] your [dual] inheritance?\'94 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93Take heed and protect yourselves from all greed, for also [/even] when a person has abundance, his life does not come from his possessions.\'94 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  Furthermore, he spoke to them a comparison, saying: \'93The land of a rich man gave a big harvest. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  And he made a consideration in his mind, saying: 'What am I to do, now when I lack a place where I can gather my harvest?' 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  And he said: 'I will do so: I will tear down [
\f2\b nancar-,
\f3\b0  'undo'] my stores, and I will build some stores larger than them, and there I will gather all my grain and all my good things, 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  and I will say do myself: 'Now you have numerous good things in store for many years. Rest, eat, drink, have joy!'\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Mal Eru quente senna: '\'dahanda n\'e9r! L\'f3me sinasse canilte cuilelya lyello. T\'e1 man samuva yar ahastiel?' Sie euva yen hosta harma insen, mal ua l\'e1rea Erun.\'94\
	
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes hildoryannar: \'93Sina castanen quetin lenna: \'c1va same qu\'e1rele pa inde, pa mana matuvalde, hya pa hroaldar, pa i lanni yar coluvalde. 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  An i cuile n\'e1 mirwa l\'e1 matso, ar i hroa l\'e1 lanni. 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Cima i qu\'e1cor, i ualte rere hya *cirihta, ar ualte same haurar hya ataqui hepien nati, ananta Eru anta tien masto. Manen mirwe l\'e1 aiwi elde nar! 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Man mici le, qu\'e1releryanen, pole napane erya *perranga coivieryo andienna? 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Qui sie ualde pole care i ampitya nat, manen n\'e1 i samilde qu\'e1rele pa i lemyala nati? 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Cima manen i indili alir; ualte m\'f3ta hya lanya, mal nyarin len: Yando Solomon ilya alcareryasse \'fane netyaina ve er mici t\'e9!\
\

\f2\i\b 	20
\f3\b0  But God said to him: 'Senseless man! In this night they demand your life from you. Then who will have [the things] that you have gathered?' So [it] will be for [the one] who gathers treasure for himself, but is not rich to God.\'94\
	
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  Then he said to his disciples: \'93For this reason I say to you: Do not have anxiety about yourselves, about what you will eat, or about your bodies, about the things that you will wear. 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  For the life [you have] is more precious than food, and the body than clothes. 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  Give heed to the ravens [or, crows \'96 
\f2\b qu\'e1cor
\f3\b0 ], that they do not sow or harvest, and they do not have stores or buildings for keeping thigns, and yet God gives them food. How [much] more precious than birds you are! 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  Who among you, by worrying, can add a single cubit to the length of his life? 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  If thus you cannot do the smallest thing, how is [it] that you have worries about the remaining things? 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  Heed how the lilies grow; they do not toil or weave, but I tell you: Also [/even] Solomon in all his glory was not adorned like one among them!\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Qui Eru sie netya i celvar i restasse, i ear s\'edra ar enwa nar h\'e1tine mir urna, manen ole ambe netyuvas l\'e9, elde pitya savi\'e9no! 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Etta \'e1va cesta mana matuvalde hya mana sucuvalde, ar \'e1va same qu\'e1rele, 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  an ilye nati sine nar yar i mardo n\'f3ri cestar, ono Atarelda ista i samilde maure sine nativa. 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Mal \'e1 cesta minyave aranierya, ar nati sine nauvar len nap\'e1nine!\
	
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  \'c1va ruce, \'e1 pitya l\'e1m\'e1re, an Atarelda as\'e1nie mai anta len i aranie! 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Vaca yar samilde ar \'e1 anta annar i penyain. Cara len *pocoller i ua oi yeryuvar, *alaloitala harma menelde, yasse arpo ua tule hare hya malo ammate. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  An yasse harmalda ea, tasse yando endalda euva.\
	
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Hepa i quilta o\uc0\u351 weldasse ar calmaldar uryala, 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  ar elde na ve atani y\'e9tala ompa herulto entulessenna i veryanwello, polieltan latya sen m\'ed imya l\'fa ya tulis tambala.\
\

\f2\i\b 28
\f3\b0  If God so adorns the plants in the field, that exist today and tomorrow are thrown into an oven, how much more will he adorn you, you of little faith! 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  Therefore do not seek what you are to eat or what you are to drink, and do not have anxiety, 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  for all these things are [the things] that the nations of the world seek, but your Father knows that you have need of these things. 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  But seek first his kingdom, and these things will be added to you!\
	
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  Do not be afraid, o little flock, for your Father has thought well to give you the kingdom! 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  Sell [the things] that you have and give gifts to the poor. Make for yourselves pouches that will not ever wear, an unfailing treasure in heaven, where a thief does not come near or a moth devour. 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  For [in the place] where your treasure is, there also your heart will be.\
	
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  Keep the belt on your hips and your lamps burning, 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  and you be like men looking forward to their master's return from the marriage, for them to be able to open to him in the same moment that he comes knocking.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Valime nar i m\'f3li ion heru, \'edre nanwenis, hire te t\'edra! N\'e1sie quetin lenna: Notuvas *os o\uc0\u351 werya ar lavuva tien caita ara i sarno, ar tuluvas n\'e1ven n\'faro tien. 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Ar qui tulis m\'ed attea tirisse, hya m\'ed neldea, ar hire te sie, valime nalte! 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Mal \'e1 ista nat sina, i qui i *coantur sinte i l\'fame yasse i arpo tulumne, anes coiva ar ua l\'e1ve aiquenen race mir coarya. 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Yando elde na manwaine, an i Atanyondo t\'fala mi l\'fame ya ualde sana.\
	
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  T\'e1 P\'e9ter quente: \'93Heru, ma quetil sestie sina elmenna hya yando ilyannar?\'94 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Ar i Heru quente: \'93\'c9 man n\'e1 i voronda mardil, i handa, yeo ort\'edriesse herurya panyuva ilye n\'faroryar, antieryan tien matsolta m\'ed vanima l\'fame?\
\

\f2\i\b 37
\f3\b0  Happy are the thralls whose master, when he returns, finds them watching! Truly I say to you: He will bind around his hip and will allow them to lie at the table, and he will come to be a servant to them. 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  And if he comes in the second watch, or in the third, and finds them so, happy they are! 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  But know this thing, that if the master of the house knew the time when the thief was going to come, he was awake and did not allow anyone to break into his house. 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  You as well be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at a time that you do not think.\
	
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  Then Peter said: \'93Lord, do you speak this comparison to us or also to all?\'94 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  And the Lord said: \'93Indeed who is the faithful steward, the intelligent one, in whose oversight his lord will place all his servants, for him to give them their food at the proper time?\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  Valima n\'e1 m\'f3l tana, ye herurya \'edre tulis hiruva c\'e1ra sie. 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  Nanwave quetin lenna i or ilye armaryar se-panyuvas. 
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  Mal qui m\'f3l tana quete endaryasse: 'Herunya ua tuluva rato', ar *yestas pete i n\'faror ar i *n\'fari, ar mate ar suce ar quate inse limpenen, 
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  m\'f3l tano heru tuluva auresse ya uas sana ar l\'famesse ya uas ista, ar se-peryuvas ar sen-antuva masserya as i \'favorondar. 
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  T\'e1 m\'f3l tana ye hanyane heruryo \uc0\u351 elma, mal ua manwane inse hya carne \u351 elmarya, nauva palpaina rimbe tarambol\'ednen. 
\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  Mal ye ua hanyane sa, ar sie carne nati valde palpi\'e9no, nauva palpaina mance tarambol\'ednen. An ho ilquen yen olya anaie antaina, olya nauva c\'e1nina, ar ho qu\'e9n yeo ort\'edriesse ap\'e1nielte olya, canuvalte amba l\'e1 senwa.\
\

\f2\i\b 42
\f3\b0  Happy is that thrall, whom his master when he comes will find doing so. 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you that over all his goods he will put him. 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  But if that thrall says in his heart: 'My master will not come soon', and he begins to strike the servants and the maidservants, and eats and drinks and fills himself with wine, 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  that thrall's master will come in a day that he does not think and at an hour that he does not know, and he will cut him in two and give him his portion with the faithless ones. 
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  Then that thrall who understood his master's wish, but did not prepear himself or did his will, will be beaten with many blows. 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  But [he] who did not understand it, and so did things worthy of beating, will be beaten with few blows. For from anyone to whom much has been given, much will be demanded, and from a person in whose oversight they have placed much, they will demand more than usual.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  N\'e1re ut\'falien hate cemenna, ar mana meruvan qui anaies nartaina yando s\'ed? 
\f0\b 50
\f1\b0  *Tumyale samin yanen nauvan *tumyaina, ar manen n\'edrina nanye tenna anaies telyaina! 
\f0\b 51
\f1\b0  Ma sanalde i ut\'falien antien raine cemende? Ui, quetin lenna, mal \uc0\u351 ancie! 
\f0\b 52
\f1\b0  An ho s\'ed euvar lempe \uc0\u351 ance erya coasse, nelde attanna ar atta neldenna. 
\f0\b 53
\f1\b0  Nauvalte \uc0\u351 ance, atar yondonna ar yondo atarenna, amil yeldenna ar yelde amillenna, ar n\'eds yondoryo verinna, ar i veri veruryo amillenna.\'94\
	
\f0\b 54
\f1\b0  T\'e1 yando quentes i \uc0\u351 angannar: \'93\'cdre cenilde lumbo ortea N\'famesse, m\'ed imya l\'fa quetilde: Raumo t\'fala \'96  ar sie euva. 
\f0\b 55
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre cenilde \uc0\u351 \'fare ya v\'e1va Hyarmello, quetilde: Lauca nauva \'96 ar sie euva. 
\f0\b 56
\f1\b0  *Imnetyandor, istalde henta cemeno ar menelo ilce, mal manen n\'e1 i ualde ista henta l\'fame sina? \
\
	
\f2\i\b 49
\f3\b0  A fire I have come to throw upon earth, and what am I to wish if it has been kindled even now? 
\f2\b 50
\f3\b0  A baptism I have that I will be baptized with, and how pressed I am until it has been completed! 
\f2\b 51
\f3\b0  Do you think that I have come to give peace on earth? No, I say to you, but division! 
\f2\b 52
\f3\b0  For from now [there] will be five split in a single house, three against two and two against three. 
\f2\b 53
\f3\b0  They will be split, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, and a woman against her son's wife, and the wife against her husband's mother.\'94\
	
\f2\b 54
\f3\b0  Then he also said to the crowds: \'93When you see a cloud rising in the West, in the same moment you say: A storm is coming \'96 and so it will be. 
\f2\b 55
\f3\b0  And when you see wind that blows from South, you say: It will be hot \'96 and so it will be. 
\f2\b 56
\f3\b0  Hypocrites, you know [how] to read the appearance of earth and heaven, but how is [it] that you do not know [how] to read this time?\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 57
\f1\b0  Manen n\'e1 i ualde name yando elden mana faila n\'e1? 
\f0\b 58
\f1\b0  An \'edre m\'e9nal as \'f1ottolya n\'e1monna, rica m\'ed malle n\'e1ven l\'e9ra costelyallo \'f3se \'96 hya tucuvas lye epe i n\'e1mo, ar i n\'e1mo antuva lye olla i  *n\'e1mondurenna, ar i *n\'e1mondur hatuva lye mir mando. 
\f0\b 59
\f1\b0  Nyarin lyen: Ual ettuluva talo n\'f3 apaitiel i m\'e9tima pitya ranta urusteva!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 57
\f3\b0  How is [it] that you cannot judge also for yourselves what is just? 
\f2\b 58
\f3\b0  For when you [sg.] are going with your enemy to a judge, strive in the way to be free from your strife with him \'96 or he will draw you before the judge, and the judge will give you over to the court servant [lit. judge-servant], and the court-servant will throw you into jail. 
\f2\b 59
\f3\b0  I tell you: You [sg.] will not come out from there before you have paid the last small piece of copper!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 13\

\f1\b0 L\'fame yanasse quelli i enger tasse nyarner sen pa i queni Alileallo ion serce Pil\'e1to etulyane mir serce *yancaltaron. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Etta hanquentasse quentes t\'e9na: \'93Ma intyalde i queni sine Alileallo n\'e1ner \'facarindoli ambe t\'fare l\'e1 ilye exi Alileasse, pan perp\'e9relte ta? 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Laume, quetin lenna; mal qui ualde hire inwis, illi mici le nauvar nanc\'e1rine m\'ed imya l\'e9. 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Hya i toloque innar i mindo Siloamesse lantane, nahtala te \'96 ma intyalde i s\'e1melte rohta t\'fara l\'e1 ya ilye exi i marir Yer\'fasalemesse samir? 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Laume, quetin lenna; mal qui ualde hire inwis, illi mici le nauvar nanc\'e1rine m\'ed imya l\'e9. \
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 13\

\f3\b0 At that time some that were there told him about the people from Galilee whose blood Pilate poured forth into the blood of their sacrifices. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  Therefore in answer he said to them: \'93Do you suppose that these people from Galilee were sinners greater than all others in Galilee, since they suffered that? 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  By no means, I say to you; but if you do not find repentance, all among you will be destroyed in the same manner. 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  Or the eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, killing them \'96 do you suppose that they had a debt greater than [that] which all others that live in Jerusalem have? 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  By no means, I say to you; but if you do not find repentance, all among you will be destroyed in the same manner.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na sestie sina: \'93N\'e9r s\'e1me *rely\'e1valda tarwaryasse liantassion, ar t\'fales cestien y\'e1ve sesse, mal hirnes munta. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes i *tarwandurenna: 'Y\'e9, loassen nelde ut\'falien cestala y\'e1ve *rely\'e1valda sinasse, mal ih\'edrien munta. \'c1se cire undu! Mana casta ea hepien se tasse, h\'e9pala i talan \'fa anti\'e9no y\'e1ve?' 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse quentes senna: 'Heru, \'e1sen lave tare yando loa sinasse, ar sapuvan *os se ar panyuva m\'faco tasse. 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Qui t\'e1 antuvas y\'e1ve i t\'falala loasse, m\'e1ra n\'e1. Mal qui laias, ciruvalyes undu.'\'94\

\f0\b 	10
\f1\b0  S\'ed Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne peantala mi er i *yomencoaron i *sendaresse. 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! enge tasse n\'eds ye ter loar toloque n\'e1ne haryaina lo faire se-c\'e1rala milya: Anes c\'fana, ar ua ence sen tare t\'e9ra.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 6
\f3\b0  Then he spoke to them this comparison: \'93A man had a fig tree in his garden of vines, and he came to seek fruit on it, but he found nothing. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  Then he said to the gardener: 'Look, for three years I have come seeking fruit on this fig tree, but I have found nothing. Cut it down! What reason is [there] for keeping it there, keeping the ground [occupied] without giving fruit?'\'94  
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  In answer he said to him: 'Lord, allow it do stand also this year, and I will dig around it and will place muck there. 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  If it will then give fruit in the coming year, very well. But if it does not, you will cut it down.'\'94\
	
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  Now Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues on the day of rest. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  And behold! [there] was there a woman who for [
\f2\b ter
\f3\b0 , through] eighteen years was possessed by a spirit making her weak: She was bent, and it was not possible for her to stand straight.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b \cf2 12
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre cennes i n\'eds, Y\'e9sus yalle se insenna ar quente: \'93N\'eds, nalye leryaina i hl\'edvello lye-c\'e1rala milya.\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Ar panyanes m\'e1ryat sesse, ar m\'ed imya l\'fa orontes tarien t\'e9ra, ar antanes alcar Erun. 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Mal i turco i *yomencavo, n\'e1la r\'fa\uc0\u351 ea pan Y\'e9sus nestane i *sendaresse, quente i \u351 anganna: \'93Ear auri enque yassen mauya mole! Etta tula mi tai n\'e1ven nestaina, ar l\'e1 i *sendaresse!\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Mal i Heru hanquente senna: \'93*Imnetyandor, ma ua ilquen mici le i *sendaresse lehta mundorya hya *pelloporya ho i salquecolca ar tulya se oa sucien? 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Mal n\'eds sina, ye n\'e1 Avraham yelde ye S\'e1tan eh\'e9pie hampa ter loar toloque \'96 ma ua mauyane se-lehta n\'fate sinallo i *sendaresse?\'94 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre quentes ta, ilye i tarner senna n\'e1ner nucumne, ar i quanda \uc0\u351 anga s\'e1me alasse pa ilye i alquarinque nati yar martaner s\'e9nen.\
\

\f2\i\b 12
\f3\b0  But when he saw the woman, Jesus called her to himself and said: \'93Woman, you are freed from the illness making you weak.\'94 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  And he put his hands on her, and in the same moment she arose to stand straight, and she gave glory to God. 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  But the chief of the synagogue, being angry since Jesus healed on the day of rest, said to the crowd: \'93There are six days in which it is necessary to work. There come on them to be healed, and not on the day of rest!\'94 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  But the Lord answered him: \'93Hypocrites, does not everyone among you on the day of rest loose his ox or his ass from the manger [lit. grass-box] and lead it away to drink? 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  But this woman, who is a daughter of Abraham whom Satan has kept restrained for [lit. through] eighteen years \'96 was it not necessary to loose her from this bond on the day of rest?\'94 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  And when he said that, all that stood against him were humiliated, and the entire crowd had joy concerning all the glorious things that happened by him.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Etta quentes: \'93Ve mana Eruo aranie, ar as mana sestuvanyes? 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Nas ve erde *sinapio, ya n\'e9r nampe ar panyane tarwaryasse, ar alles mir alda, ar menelo aiwi marner olvaryassen.\'94\
	
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ar ata quentes: \'93As mana sestuvan Eruo aranie? 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Nas ve *pulmaxe, ya n\'eds nampe ar nurtane lestassen nelde poriva, tenna ilqua n\'e1ne p\'falienwa.\'94\
	
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Ar lendes ostollo ostonna ar mastollo mastonna, peantala \'edre lelendes Yer\'fasalemenna. 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  S\'ed qu\'e9n quente senna: \'93Heru, ma nar i rehtainar mance?\'94 Quentes t\'e9na: 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  \'93Rica menien minna ter i n\'e1ha fenna! An rimbali, quetin lenna, cestuvar mene minna, mal ualte poluva, 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  i l\'famello ya i heru i cavo orontie ar apahtie i fenna, ar tarilde i ettesse, tambala i fennasse, qu\'e9tala: 'Heru, \'e1men latya!' Mal hanquentasse quetuvas lenna: 'Uan ista mallo ut\'falielde.'\
\
	
\f2\i\b 18
\f3\b0  Therefore he said: \'93Like what [is] God's kingdom, and with what am I to compare it? 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  It is like a seed of mustard, that a man took and put in his garden, and it grew into a tree, and the birds of heaven dwelt in its branches.\'94\
	
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  And again he said: \'93With what am I to compare God's kingdom? 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, until everythign was leavened [lit. Swollen].\'94 \

\f2\b 	22
\f3\b0  And he went from city to city and from village to village, teaching while he was travelling to Jerusalem. 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  Now a person said to him: \'93Lord, are the saved ones few?\'94 He said to them: 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  \'93Strive to go inside through the narrow door! For numerous ones, I say to you, will seek to go inside, but they will not be able, 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  from the hour that he master of the house has arisen and has closed the door, and you stand on the outside, knocking on the door, saying: 'Lord, open to us!' But in answer he will say to you: 'I do not know where you have come from.'\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quetuvalde: 'Mantelme ar suncelme epe lye, ar peantanel mallelmassen!' 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Mal hanquetuvas lenna sie: 'Uan ista mallo ut\'falielde. Heca nillo, ilye i carir \'fafailie!' 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Tasse yaim\cf0 elda ar molielda nelciva euvar, \'edre cenilde Avraham ar \'cdsac ar Y\'e1cov ar ilye i Eruterc\'e1nor mi Eruo aranie, mal elde nar h\'e1tine ettenna. 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Ente, queni tuluvar R\'f3mello ar N\'famello ar Formello ar Hyarmello, ar caituvalte ara i sarno mi Eruo aranie. 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! ear teldali i nauvar minye, ar ear minyali i nauvar telde.\'94\
	\

\f2\i\b 26
\f3\b0  Then you will say: 'We ate and drank before you, and you taught in our streets!' 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  But he will answer you so: 'I do not know where you have come from. Begone from me, all who do unrighteousness!' 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  There your wailing and your grinding of teeth will be, when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in God's kingdom, but you are thrown outside. 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  Furthermore, people will come from East and West and North and South, and they will lie at the table in God's kingdom. 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  And behold! [there] are some last ones that will be first, and [there] are some first ones that will be last.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 	31
\f1\b0  L\'fame yanasse t\'faler Faris\'e1li i quenter senna: \'93Mena ettenna ar \'e1 auta silo, an Herol mere nahta lye!\'94 
\f0\b \cf2 32
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mena ar queta rusco tananna: Y\'e9, et-hatin raucor ar carin nestie s\'edra ar enwa, ar i neldea auresse nauvan telyaina. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Ananta mauya nin lelelya mallenyasse s\'edra ar enwa ar i hilyala auresse, an ua l\'e1vina Eruterc\'e1non n\'e1ve nancarna ettesse Yerusal\'e9mo. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Yer\'fasalem, Yer\'fasalem, ye nahta i Eruterc\'e1nor ar *sarya i anaier mentaine senna \'96 manen rimbave mernen comya h\'ednalyar ve poroce comya nessaryar nu r\'e1maryat! Mal ualde merne. 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Y\'e9, coalda n\'e1 hehtaina elden! Nyarin lenna i laume cenuvalde ni tenna quetilde: Aistana n\'e1 ye t\'fala m\'ed H\'e9ruo esse!\'94\
\

\f3\i 	
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  At that time [there] came some Pharisees that said to him: \'93Go out and go away from here, for Herod wishes to kill you!\'94 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93Go and say to that fox: Behold, I throw out demons and I perform healing today and tomorrow, and on the third day I am finished. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  And yet it is necessary for me to keep travelling on my road today and tomorrow and on the following day, for it is not allowed for a prophet to be destroyed outside of Jerusalem. 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets and stones those that have been sent to her \'96 how often [
\f2\b rimbave
\f3\b0 , frequently] I wanted to gather your children like a hen gathers her young under her wings! But you did not want to. 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  Behold, your house is abandoned to yourselves! I tell you that you will by no means see me until you say: Blessed is [he] who is coming in the name of the Lord!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 14\

\f1\b0 Ar mi l\'fa \'edre lendes mir coa turcova i Farisaron matien masta, tirneltes harive. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! enge tasse n\'e9r epe se ye n\'e1ne p\'falienwa, arwa acca olya neno hroaryasse. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Etta Y\'e9sus carampe i \uc0\u351 anyengolmonnar, qu\'e9tala: \'93Ma n\'e1 l\'e1vina i *sendaresse nesta, hya l\'e1?\'94 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Mal anelte quilde. T\'e1 nampes i n\'e9r, nestane se ar mentane se oa. 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Man mici le, qui yondorya hya mundorya lanta mir tampo, ua tucuva se ama i *sendaresse?\'94 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Ar ualte pole hanquete nati sine.\
	
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  T\'e1 nyarnes sestie i nerin i n\'e1ner tultaine, \'edre t\'fanes manen cillelte i amminde n\'f3mi inten, qu\'e9tala t\'e9na: 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  \'93\'cdre nalde tultaine lo qu\'e9n veryanwenna, \'e1va caita undu i amminda n\'f3messe. C\'e9 qu\'e9n minda l\'e1 elye anaie tultaina lo se, 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  ar i qu\'e9n ye lye-tultane tuluva ar quetuva lyenna: 'Lava n\'e9r sinan same i n\'f3me!' Ar t\'e1 mauya lyen mene nucumna i amnalda n\'f3menna.\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 14\

\f3\b0 And on an occasion when he went into a house of a chief of the Pharisees to eat bread, they watched him closely.\
	
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  And behold! [there] was there a man before him who was swollen, having too much water in his body. 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  Therefore Jesus spoke to the lawyers, saying: \'93Is it allowed on the day of rest to heal, or not?\'94 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  But they were silent. Then he took the man, healed him and sent him away. 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93Who among you, if his son or his ox falls into a well, does not pull him [/it] up on the day of rest?\'94 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  And they could not answer these things.\
	
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  Then he told a comparison to the men that were invited, when he perceived how they close the most prominent places for themselves, saying to them: 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  \'93When you are summoned by a person to a wedding, do not lie down at the most prominent place. Perhaps a person more prominent than you has been invited by him, 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  and the person who summoned you will come and say to you: 'Allow this man to have the place!' And then it is necessary for you to go humbled to the lowest place.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre nalye tultaina, mena ar \'e1 caita i amnalda n\'f3messe. Sie, \'edre i n\'e9r ye tultane lye tule, quetuvas lyenna: 'Meldo, tula ama, ambe inga!' T\'e1 samuval alcar epe ilye i queni i anaier tultaine aselye. 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  An ilquen ye orta inse nauva nucumna, mal ye nucume inse nauva ortaina.\'94\
	
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ente, quentes yenna tultane se: \'93\'cdre caril \uc0\u351 inyemat hya ahtumat, \'e1va tulta meldolyar, hya h\'e1nolyar, hya i queni nosselyo, hya l\'e1rie armarolyar. C\'e9 yando t\'e9 tultuvar ly\'e9 ata, ar ta nauva lyen *nampaityale. 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre caril merende, \'e1 tulta penyar, *hroaloicali, *\'fal\'e9vimar, *c\'e9nel\'f3rar, 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  ar nauval valima, an t\'e9 samir munta yanen ece tien paitya lyen. An nauva paityaina lyen qualinion ortiesse!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 10
\f3\b0  But when you are invited, go and lie at the lowliest place. Thus, when the man who invited you comes, he will say to you: 'Friend, come up, higher!' Then you will have glory before the people that have been invited with you. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  For everyone who raises [/elevates] himself will be humbled, but [he] who humbles himself will be raised up.\'94\
	
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  Furthermore, he said to [the one] who invited him: \'93When you make an evening meal or a supper, do not summon your friends, or your brothers, or the people of your kin, or your rich neighbors. Perhaps they also will invite you again, and that will be for you a paying back. 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  But when you make a feast, invite poor ones, cripples, lame ones, blind ones, 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  and you will be happy, for they have nothing with which it is possible for them to repay you. For [it] will be repaid to you in the rising of [the] dead!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Hl\'e1rala ta, qu\'e9n mici i cainer ara i sarno quente: \'93Valima n\'e1 ye mate massa mi Eruo aranie!\'94\

\f0\b 	16
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Enge n\'e9r ye manwane t\'fara ahtumat, ar tultanes rimbali. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Ar mentanes n\'farorya i ahtumatto l\'famesse, quetien innar n\'e1ner tultaine: \'93Tula, an s\'ed ilqua manwa n\'e1!\'94 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0   Mal illi mici te *yestaner anta castali uien tule. I minya quente senna: 'Amancien imnin resta, ar mauya nin lelya cenien sa. Iquin lyello, \'e1va sana ulco pa ni pan ua ece nin tule!' 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Ar exe quente: 'Amancien imnin yantar lempe mundoron, ar m\'e9nan tyastien te. Iquin lyello, \'e1va sana ulco pa ni pan ua ece nin tule.' 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ar exe quente: 'Ev\'e9rien nissenna, ar etta ua ece nin tule.' 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  \'cdre nanwennes, i m\'f3l nyarne nati sine heruryanna. T\'e1 i cavo turco n\'e1ne r\'fa\uc0\u351 ea ar quente m\'f3lyanna: 'Mena linti\'e9nen mir i maller ar tier i ostosse, ar \'e1 tala sir i penyar ar *hroaloicar ar *c\'e9nel\'f3rar ar *\'fal\'e9vimar!' \
\

\f2\i\b 15 
\f3\b0 Hearing that, one among [those] who lay at the table said: \'93Happy is [the one] who eats bread in God's kingdom!\'94\
	
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  Jesus said to him: \'93[There] was a man who prepared a great supper, and he invited numerous ones. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  And he sent his servant at the hour of the supper, to say to [those] who were invited: \'93Come, for now everything is ready!\'94 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  But all among them started to give reasons not to come. The first said to him: 'I have bought [lit. traded to myself] a field, and it is necessary for me to go to see it. I beg of you, do not think evil about me since it is not possible for me to come!' 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  And another said: 'I have traded to myself five yokes of oxes, and I am going to test them. I beg of you, do not think evil about me since it is not possible for me to come.' 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  And another said: 'I have married a woman, and therefore it is not possible for me to come.' 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  When he returned, the thrall told these things to his lord. Then the chief of the house was angry and said to his thrall: 'Go with speed into the streets and ways in the city, and bring here the poor ones and cripples and blind ones and lame ones!'\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Ar i m\'f3l quente: \'93Heru, ya cannel anaie carna, ar en ea n\'f3me.\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Ar i heru quente i m\'f3lenna: \'93\'c1 etelelya mir i maller ar i pelerinnar ar \'e1ten mauya tule minna, quatien coanya. 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  An quetin lenna: *\'daquen im\'edca i neri i n\'e1ner tultaine tyavuvar ahtumattinya!'\'94\
	
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  S\'ed hoe \uc0\u351 angali lelender \'f3se, ar quernes inse ar quente t\'e9na: 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  \'93Qui aiquen tule ninna ar ua teve atarya ar amillerya ar verirya ar h\'ednaryar ar h\'e1noryar ar n\'e9\uc0\u351 aryar, \'e9 v\'e9ra cuilerya, ua ece sen n\'e1ve hildonya. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Yen ua c\'f3la tarwerya ar t\'fala apa ni, ua ece n\'e1ve hildonya. 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  An man mici le i mere carasta mindo ua minyave hame undu onotien i nonwe carasti\'e9no, istien qui samis f\'e1rea telpe telien sa? 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Qui laias, c\'e9 panyas i mindo talma, mal ua ece sen telya i mindo, ar ilye i t\'edrar c\'e9 *yestuvar quete yaiwe pa se, 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  qu\'e9tala: 'N\'e9r sina *yestane carasta, mal ua ence sen telya.'\
\

\f2\i\b 22
\f3\b0  And the thrall said: \'93Lord, what you commanded has been done, and still [there] is place.\'94 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  And the lord said to the thrall: \'93Go out into the roads and to the fenced fields and compel them to come inside, in order to fill my house. 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  For I say to you [pl.]: No one among the men that were invited will taste my supper!'\'94\
	
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  Now great crowds were travelling with him, and he turned [Q: turned himself] and said to them: 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  \'93If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and his mother and his wife and his sisters, indeed his own life, [it] is not possible for him to be my disciple. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  To [the one] who is not carrying his cross and coming after me, it is not possible to be my disciple. 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  For who among you that wishes to build a tower does not first sit down to calculate the sum [/cost] of building, to know if he as enough money to complete it? 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  If he does not, perhaps he puts the foundation of the tower [in place], but it is not possible for him to complete it, and all that are watching will perhaps start to speak mockery about him, 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  saying: 'This man started to build, but it was not possible for him to finish.'\

\f1\i0 \
 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Hya man n\'e1 i aran ye veluva hyana aran ohtasse ar ua minyave hame undu carien \'favie qui polis ohtarinen h\'fami quean mahta yenna tule senna arwa h\'fami *y\'faquean? 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Qui uas pole mahta senna, mentas queni i quetuvar r\'e1 sen \'edre i exe en haira n\'e1, cestala raine. 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Sie, etta, *\'faquen mici le ye ua quete nam\'e1rie ilye armaryannar pole n\'e1ve hildonya.\
	
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Singe \'e9 n\'e1 m\'e1ra, mal qui i singeo ty\'e1ve nauva vanwa, mananen mo antuva san ty\'e1ve ata? 
\f0\b 35 
\f1\b0 Uas m\'e1ra cemnen hya ve m\'faco v\'e9la. Queni hatir sa ettenna. Lava yen same hlaru lastien, lasta!\
\

\f2\i\b 31
\f3\b0  Or who is the king who will meet another king at war and does not first sit down to make a consideration whether he can with ten thousand warriors fight against [the one] who comes against him having twenty thousands? 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  If he cannot fight against him, he sends people who will speak on his behalf while the other is still far away, seeking peace. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  Thus, therefore, no one among you that does not say farewell to all his goods can be my disciple.\
	
\f2\b 34 
\f3\b0 Salt is indeed good, but if the taste of the salt is gone, with what will one give it taste again? 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  It is not good for soil or as manure alike. People throw it outside. Let [him] who has ears to listen, listen!  \

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 15\

\f1\b0 Ilye i *tungwemor ar \'facarindor t\'faler hare senna hlarien se. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Etta i Farisar ar i \uc0\u351 anyengolmor nurruner, qu\'e9tala: \'93N\'e9r sina came \'facarindor ar mate aselte!\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes sestie sina t\'e9na: 
\f0\b 4 
\f1\b0 \'93Man n\'e1 i n\'e9r mici le arwa m\'e1maron tuxa ye ua, qui er mici te n\'e1 vanwa, hehtuva i nerte *neterquean i erumasse ar cestuva i vanwa m\'e1ma tenna hirises? 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ar apa hirie se panyuvas se pontiryasse, arwa alasseo. 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Ar apa tulie marda tultas meldoryar ar armaroryar ar quete t\'e9na: 'Na valime asinye, an ih\'edrien m\'e1manya, ye n\'e1ne vanwa.' 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Quetin lenna i m\'ed imya l\'e9, \'edre er \'facarindo hire inwis, ea menelde alasse t\'fara l\'e1 ya ea pa \'facarindor nerte *neterquean i uar same maure inwisteva.\
	
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Hya man n\'e1 i n\'eds ye same \ul racmar\ulnone  quean ye ua narta calma ar poita coarya qui er mici tai n\'e1 vanwa, cestala harive tenna hirises? 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre sa-ih\'edries, comyas melderyar ar *armareryar ar quete: 'Na valime asinye, an ih\'edrien i \ul racma\ulnone  ya n\'e1ne vanwa nin!' 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Sie, quetin lenna, euva alasse mici Eruo valar pa er \'facarindo ye hire inwis.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 15\

\f3\b0 All the tax collectors and sinners came near to him to hear him. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  Therefore the Pharisees and the lawyers grumbled, saying: \'93This man receives sinners and eats with them!\'94 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  Then he spoke this comparison to them: 
\f2\b 4 
\f3\b0 \'93Who is the man among you having a hundred sheep who does not, if one among them is lost, leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness and will seek the lost sheep until he finds it? 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  And after finding it he will put it on his back, having joy. 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  And after coming home he summons his friends and his neighbors and says to them: 'Be happy with me, for I have found my sheep, that was lost.' 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  I say to you that in the same manner, when one sinner finds repentance, [there] is in heaven a joy greater than [that] which [there] is concerning ninety-nine sinners that do not have need of repentance.\
	
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  Or who is the woman who has ten drachmas who does not kindle a lamp and clean her house if one of them is lost, seeking closely until she finds it? 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  And when she has found it, she gathers her friends [
\f2\b melde
\f3\b0 : female friend] and says: 'Be happy with me, for I have found the drachma that was lost to me!' 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  Thus, I say to you, [there] will be joy among God's angels concerning one sinner who finds repentance.\'94\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes: \'93Enge n\'e9r as ye enget yondo atta. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ar i ambe nessa mici tu quente ataryanna: \'93Atar, \'e1nin anta i ranta i armaron ya lanta massenyan.\'94 T\'e1 *ciltanes laulestarya t\'fan. 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Epeta, apa l\'e1 rimbe auri, i ambe nessa yondo comyane ilqua ar lende oa mir haira n\'f3re, ar tasse hantes oa telperya verca coiviesse. \
	
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Apa *yuhtanes ilqua enge urda saicele n\'f3re tanasse, ar *yestanes same maure. 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Lendes himyala er i quenion i marner n\'f3re tanasse, ye mentane se mir restaryar tirien polcar. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ar mernes quate inse i vain\'ednen yar i polcar manter, mal *\'faquen antane sen nat.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 11
\f3\b0  Then he said: \'93[There] was a man with whom [there] were two sons. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  And the younger among them [dual] said to his father: \'93Father, give me the part of the goods that falls to my portion.\'94 Then he divided his livelihood to them [dual]. 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  Thereafter, after not many days, the younger son gathered everything and went away into a remote land, and here he threw away his money on a wild life.\
	
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  After he used [or, spent] everything, [there] was a severe famine in that land, and he began to have need. 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  He went attaching himself to one of the people that lived in that land, who sent him into his fields to watch pigs. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  And he wished to fill himself with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no one gave him a thing.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre nanwennes laicenna quentes: \'93Ilye i paityane queni i molir atarinyan samir \'fave massava,   \'edre inye qu\'e9la saicel\'e9nen! 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ortuvan ar lelyuvan atarinyanna, ar quetuvan senna: Atar, \'faac\'e1rien menelenna ar tyenna. 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Uan valda en n\'e1ven estaina yondotya, mal \'e1ni care ve er i paityane quenion i molir tyen.'\
	
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ar orontes ar t\'fale ataryanna. \'cdre en anes haiya, i atar cenne se, ar endarya etelende senna, ar n\'f3rala senna lantanes axeryanna ar minque se. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Mal i yondo quente: 'Atar, \'faac\'e1rien menelenna ar tyenna. 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Uan valda en n\'e1ven estaina yondotya. \'c1ni care ve er i paityane quenion i molir tyen.' 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Ono i atar quente n\'faroryannar: 'Lintave, \'e1 tala colla, i arya, ar \'e1sa panya sesse, ar \'e1 panya corma m\'e1ryasse ar hyapat taluryatse, 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  ar \'e1 tala i maitana nessa mundo, \'e1se nahta ar alve mate ar same alasse! 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  An yondonya sina n\'e1ne qualin ar enut\'falie coivienna; anes vanwa ar anaie h\'edrina!' Ar *yestanelte same alasse.\
\

\f2\i\b 17
\f3\b0  But when he returned to keenness of perception he said: 'All the paid people that work for my father have an abundance of bread, while I am dying from famine! 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  I will rise and I will go to my father, and I will say to him: Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  I am not worthy to still be called your son, but make me like one of the paid people that work for you.'\
	
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  And he arose and came to his father. When he was still far away, the father saw him, and his heart went out to him, and running to him he fell upon his neck and kissed him. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  But the son said: 'Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  I am not worthy to still be called your son. Make me like one of the paid people that work for you.' 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  But the father said to his servants: 'Quickly, bring a cloak, the best one, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet, 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  and bring the fattened young bull, kill it and let us eat and have joy! 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  For this son of mine was dead and has come back to life; he was lost and has been found!' And they began to have joy.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Mal ambe y\'e1ra h\'e1norya n\'e1ne i restasse, ar \'edre t\'fales ar lende hare i coanna, hlasses lindale ar quelli liltala. 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Yalles er i n\'farion ar maquente pa mana nati sine tenger. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Quentes senna: 'H\'e1nolya ut\'falie, ar atarelya anahtie i maitana nessa mundo, pan *nanac\'e1mies se m\'e1lesse.' 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Mal anes r\'fa\uc0\u351 ea ar ua merne mene minna. T\'e1 atarya t\'fale ettenna ar arcane sello. 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse quentes ataryanna: 'Ter ta rimbe loar om\'f3tien tyen, ar canwatya uan oi rance, ananta uatye oi antane nin nessa *naico samienyan alasse as meldonyar. 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre ut\'falie yondotya sina ye ammante laulestatya as *imbacindeli, nahtatye i maitana mundo sen!' \
	
\f0\b 31 
\f1\b0 T\'e1 quentes senna: 'H\'edna, illume anaietye asinye, ar ilye ninyar nar *tyenyar, 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  mal mauyane same alasse ar n\'e1ve valime, an sina h\'e1notya n\'e1ne qualin ar nanwenne coivienna, ar anes vanwa ar anaie h\'edrina!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 25
\f3\b0  But his older brother was in the field, and when he came and went near to the house, he heard music and people dancing. 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  He called one of the servants and asked about what these things meant. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  He said to him: 'Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened young bull, since he received him back in good health.' 
\f2\b 28 
\f3\b0 But he was angry and did not wish to go in. Then his father came outside and asked of him [to come]. 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  In answer he said to his father: 'Through so many years I have toiled for you, and your command I did not ever break, and yet you did not give me [even] a young goat for me to have joy with my friends. 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  But when this son of yours has come who devoured your livelihood with whores, you kill the fattened young bull for him!'\
	
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  Then he said to him: 'Child, you have always been with me, and all [things that are] mine are yours, 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  but it was necessary to a have joy and be glad, for this brother of yours was dead and returned to life, and he was lost and has been found!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 16\

\f1\b0 T\'e1 quentes yando hildoryannar: \'93Enge atan ye n\'e1ne l\'e1rea ar s\'e1me qu\'e9n ort\'edrala coarya, mal hlasses ulca nyarie pa se \'96 i hantes oa armaryar. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Etta se-tultanes ar quente senna: 'Mana nat sina ya hlarin pa lye? \'c1 anta on\'f3tie pa molierya ve mardil, an ualye mahtuva i coa ambe.' 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  T\'e1 i mardil quente insenna: 'Mana caruvan, s\'ed \'edre herunya m\'e9ra mapa oa molienya ve mardil? Poldorenya ua farya sapien. Nauvan nucumna qui mauya nin ique. 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Mal istan mana caruvan, ty\'e1rala queni came ni mir coaltar \'edre ort\'edrienya n\'e1 mapaina nillo!' 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e1lala insenna i quanda rohtalie heruryo, quentes i minyanna: 'Mana i nonwe rohtalyo herunyan?' 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Eques: 'Lestar tuxa ilmava.' Quentes senna: '\'c1 mapa hyalinilyar ar hama undu ar lintave teca *lepenquean!'\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 16\

\f3\b0 Then he said also to his disciples: \'93[There] was a man who was rich and had a person overseeing his house, but he heard a bad report about him \'96 that he threw away his goods. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  Therefore he summoned him and said to him: 'What is this thing that I hear about you? Give a reckoning [or, an account] about your work as a steward, for you will not manage the house [any]more.' 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  Then the steward saod to himself: 'What am I to do, now when [/now that] my lord is wishing to take away my work [/postition] as steward? My strength does not suffice for digging. I shall be humiliated if it is necessary for me to beg. 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  But I know what I will do, causing people to receive me into their houses when my overseership is taken from me!' 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  And summoning to himself the entire group of debtors of his lord, he said to the first: 'What is the sum of your debt to my lord?' 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  He said: 'A hundred measures of oil.' He said to him: 'Take your papers and sit down and quickly write fifty!'\

\f1\i0 \
 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Epeta quentes exenna: 'Ar elye, mana i nonwe rohtalyo?' Quentes: '\ul Cor\ulnone -lestar tuxa oriva.' Quentes senna: '\'c1 mapa hyalinelyar ar teca *toloquean!' 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Ar i heru laitane i \'fafaila mardil, pan lenganes sailave \'96an *n\'f3nareltasse, randa sino yondor nar saile l\'e1 i calo yondor.\
	
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Ente, quetin lenna: Cara meldor elden i \'fafaila larnen! Sie, \'edre ta loita, le-camuvalte mir i oire mardi. 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  I qu\'e9n ye n\'e1 voronda mi ta ya n\'e1 ampitya, n\'e1 voronda yando olyasse, ar i qu\'e9n ye n\'e1 \'fafaila mi ta ya n\'e1 ampitya, n\'e1 \'fafaila yando mi olya.
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Etta, qui ualde voronde pa i \'fafaila lar, man  panyuva hepieldasse ta ya nanwa n\'e1? 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ar qui ualde at\'e1nie voronwelda pa ta ya n\'e1 exeva, man antuva len *aiqua ya nauva v\'e9ralda?\
\

\f2\i\b 7
\f3\b0  Thereafter he said to another: 'And you, what is the sum of your debt?' He said: 'A hunded \ul cor\ulnone  measures of grain.' He said to him: 'Take your papers and write eighty!' 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  And the lord [or, master] praised the unjust steward, since he behaved wisely \'96 for in their generation, the sons of this age are wiser than the sons of light.\
	
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  Furthermore, I say to you: Make friends for yourselves with the unrighteous riches! [Q 
\f2\b lar
\f3\b0 , singular]. Thus, when that fails, they will receive you into the eternal dwellings. 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  The person who is faithful in that which is smallest, is faithful also in much, and the person who is unrighteous in that which is smallest, is unrighteous also in much. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  Therefore, if you are not faithful concerning the unrighteous riches, who will put in your keeping that which is true? And if you have not shown your faithfulness concerning that which is another's, who will give you anything that is to be your own?\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Ua ea n\'faro yen ece n\'e1ve m\'f3l heru attan, an tevuvas er ar meluva i exe, hya himyuvas er ar nattiruva i exe. Ua ece len n\'e1ve m\'f3li Erun ar laren v\'e9la.\'94\
	
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Mal i Farisar, i m\'e9ler telpe, lastaner ilye sine natinnar, ar carampelte senna yaiwenen. 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Elde nar i quetir i nalde faile epe atani, mal Eru ista illion enda. An ta ya n\'e1 varanda atanin n\'e1 yelwa Erun. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  I \uc0\u350 anye ar i Eruterc\'e1nor n\'e1ner tenna Yoh\'e1no; ho t\'e1 mo care i evandilyon sinwa, ar illi n\'edrar sanna. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Menel cemenye autuvat n\'f3 erya tehta i \uc0\u350 anyesse lantuva oa.\
	
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ilquen ye *cilta inse veriryallo ar verya exenna, race vestale, ar ye verya nissenna *ciltaina veruryallo, race vestale.\
\

\f2\i\b 13
\f3\b0  [There] is not [any] servant to whom it is possible to be a slave for two lords, for he will hate one and love the other, or he will stick to one and despise the other. It is not possible for you to be slaves for God and for riches alike.\'94\
	
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  But the Pharisees, that loved money, listened to all these things, and they spoke to him with mockery. 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93You are [the ones] that say that you are just before men, but God knows the heart of all. For that which is sublime to men is disgusting to God. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  The Law and the Prophets were until John; from then one makes the gospel known, and all are pressing towards it. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  Heaven and earth will pass away before a single mark in the Law will fall away. \
	
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  Everyone who separates himself from his wife and gets married to another, violates [lit. breaks] marriage, and [he] who gets married to a woman divorsed from her husband, violates marriage.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Mal enge n\'e9r ye n\'e1ne l\'e1rea, ar tompes inse *luicarninen ar *p\'e1\uc0\u351 enen, arwa alasseo ilya auresse mi alcarinqua l\'e9. 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Mal enge *iquindo yeo esse n\'e1ne L\'e1saro, panyaina ara andorya, quanta sistel\'ednen. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Mernes n\'e1ve qu\'e1tina yainen lantaner sarnollo i l\'e1rea nerwa, mal yando i huor t\'faler ar l\'e1ver sisteryar. \

\f0\b 	22
\f1\b0  T\'fale i qualle i *iquindo, ar i valar colle se oa Avrah\'e1mo s\'famanna. Ente, yando i l\'e1rea n\'e9r qualle ar n\'e1ne talaina sapsaryanna.\
	
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Ar latyanes henyat mi Mandos, yasse enges \'f1walmelissen, ar cennes Avraham haiya ar L\'e1saro sumaryasse. 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Etta y\'e1mes ar quente: 'Atar Avraham, \'f3rava nisse ar \'e1 menta L\'e1saro, panieryan leperyo tille nenesse, carien lambanya ringa! An nanye \'f1walyaina n\'e1re sinasse!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 	19
\f3\b0  But [there] was a man who was rich, and he covered himself with purple and linen, having joy every day in a glorious manner. 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  But [there] was a beggar whose name was Lazarus, placed by his gate, full of ulcers. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  He wished to be filled with [whatever things] that fell from the rich man's table, but also [/even] the dogs came and licked his ulcers.\
	
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  It happened [lit. came] that the beggar died, and the angels carried him away to the bosom of Abraham. Furthermore, also the rich man died and was brought to his grave.\
	
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  And he opened his eyes in Mandos [here = Hades], where he existed in torments, and he saw Abraham far away and Lazarus in his bosom. 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  Therefore he cried and said: 'Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus, for him to put the tip of his finger in water, to make my tongue cold! For I am tormented in this fire!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Mal Avraham quente: \'93H\'edna, enyala i camnel m\'e1re natilyar coivielyasse, ar L\'e1saro m\'ed imya l\'e9 i \'fam\'e1re nati; mal s\'ed camis tiutale sisse, mal elye same naicele. 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Ar ara ilye nati sine, hoa cilya anaie panyaina imbi elme ar elde. Sie i merir lelya silo lenna uar pole; mi imya l\'e9 queni uar pole lahta talo menna.\'94 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Mal eques: \'93T\'e1 arcan lyello, atar: \'c1se menta i coanna atarinyava \'96 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  an samin h\'e1nor lempe \'96 *vettieryan tien, pustien yando t\'e9 tuliello n\'f3me sinanna \'f1walmeva!\'94 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Ono eque Avraham: \'93Samilte M\'f3ses ar i Eruterc\'e1nor; \'e1 lastar t\'e9na!\'94 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Mal s\'e9 quente: \'93V\'e1, atar Avraham, mal qui qu\'e9n tuluva t\'e9na qualinillon, hiruvalte inwis!\'94 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Ono quentes senna: \'93Qui ualte lasta M\'f3senna ar i Eruterc\'e1nonnar, qu\'e9n nanw\'e9nala qualinillon yando loituva vista s\'e1malta.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 25
\f3\b0  But Abraham said: \'93Child, recall that you received your good things in your life, and Lazarus in the same manner the bad things; but now he receives comfort here, but you have pain. 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  And beside all these things, a big cleft has been placed between us and you [pl.] Thus [those] that wish to go from here to you [pl.] are not able; in the same manner people are not able to pass from there to us.\'94 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  But he said: \'93Then I ask of you, father: Send him to my father's house \'96 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  for I have five brothers \'96 for him to witness to them, to stop them as well from coming to this place of torment!\'94 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  But Abraham said: \'93They have Moses and the Prophets; let them listen to them!\'94 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  But he said: \'93No, father Abraham, but if a person will come to them from the dead, they will find repentance!\'94 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  But he said to them: \'93If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, a person returning from [the] dead will also fail to change their mind.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 17\

\f1\b0 T\'e1 Y\'e9sus quente hildoryannar: \'93Mauya i tulir i castar lanti\'e9va, mal horro i quenen ter ye tulilte! 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Qui ondo muli\'e9va n\'e1ne panyaina *os axerya, ar anes h\'e1tina mir i ear, ta n\'e1ne sen arya l\'e1 tyarie i lante ero mici pityar sine!\

\f0\b 	3
\f1\b0  Cima inde! Qui h\'e1nolya \'facare, \'e1se naitya, ar qui samis inwis, \'e1sen apsene. 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Ar qui l\'far otso  mi erya aure \'facaris lyenna ar nanwenis lyenna l\'far otso, qu\'e9tala, 'Samin inwis!', \'e1sen apsene!\
	
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ar i aposteli quenter i Herunna: \'93\'c1men anta amba savie!\'94 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Mal i Heru quente: \'93Qui s\'e1melde savie ve erde *sinapio, pollelde quete morpialda sinanna: 'Tuca ama \uc0\u351 undulyar ar na emp\'e1nina i earesse' \'96 ar carumnes ve quetielda. \
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 17\

\f3\b0 Then Jesus said to his disciples: \'93It is necessary [= unavoidable] that the reasons for falling come, but woe to the person that they come through! 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  If a stone of grinding [= a mill-stone] was put around his nect, and he was thrown into the sea, that was to him better than causing the fall of one among these little ones!\
	
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  Take heed of yourselves! If your brother sins, rebuke him, and if he has a change of mind, forgive him. 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  And if seven times in a single day he sins against you and he returns to you seven times, saying: 'I have a change of mind!', forgive him!\
	
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  And the apostles said to the Lord: \'93Give us more faith!\'94 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  But the Lord said: \'93If you had faith like a seed of mustard, you could say to this mulberry tree [
\f2\b morpialda 
\f3\b0 for 
\f2\b mor-pie-alda
\f3\b0  'black-berry-tree]: 'Pull up your roots and be planted in the sea' \'96 and it was going to do according to your saying.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Mal man mici le, arwa m\'f3lo ye mole i hyarnen hya ve mavar, quetuva senna \'edre tulis i restallo: 'Tula sir linti\'e9nen ar \'e1 caita undu ara i sarno'? 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Ma uas ambe rato quetuva senna: '\'c1nin manwa nat ahtumattinyan, ar nuta *os o\uc0\u351 welya ar *nura nin tenna am\'e1tien ar us\'facien, ar epeta elye lerta mate ar suce' \'96 ? 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Lau sanas i samis rohta i m\'f3len pan \'e9 carnes i nati pa yar camnes canwali? 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Sie yando elde: Apa ac\'e1rielde ilye i nati pa yar camnelde canwali, queta: 'Nalve \'faa\uc0\u351 ie m\'f3li. Ac\'e1rielve ya rohtalva n\'e1ne.'\'94\
	
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Ar lendaryasse Yer\'fasalemenna langanes ter i ende Sam\'e1rio ar Alileo. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre t\'fales mir masto, helmahlaiwe neri quean veller se, mal pustanelte haire sello. 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Ar ortanelte \'f3malta ar quente: \'93Y\'e9sus, *peantar, \'f3rava messe!\'94 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre cennes te quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mena ar \'e1 tana inde i *airimoin.\'94 T\'e1, \'edre anelte i tiesse, anelte poitaine. \

\f3\i \

\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  But who among you, having a thrall who works with the plow or as a shepherd, will say to him when he comes from the field: 'Come here quickly and lie down at the table'? 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  Will he not sooner [
\f2\b ambe rato
\f3\b0 , more soon = rather] say to him: 'Prepare me something for my supper, and bind around your hips and serve [or, wait on] me until I have eaten and drunk, and thereafter you may eat and drink' \'96 ? 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  Surely he does not think that he has a debt to the thrall since he indeed did the things that he received orders about? 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  Thus also yourselves: After you have done all the things that you received orders about, say: 'We are useless slaves. We have done what our debt [or, duty] was.'  \
	
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  And on his journey towards Jerusalem he passed though the middle of Samaria and Galilee. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  And when he came into a village, ten skin-diseased men met him, but they stopped far away from him. 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  And they raised their voice and said: \'93Jesus, teacher, have mercy on us!\'94 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  And when he saw them he said to them: \'93Go and show yourselves to the priests.\'94 Then, as they were on the road, they were cleansed.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Er mici te nanwenne \'edre cennes i anes nestaina, ar hoa \'f3manen antanes alcar Erun. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ar lantanes cendeleryanna epe Y\'e9suo talu ar hantane sen; anes Sam\'e1rea n\'e9r. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Ma \'fanelte i quean nestaine? Masse, t\'e1, nar i hyane nerte? 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ma enge *\'faquen ye nanwenne antien alcar Erun, hequa n\'e9r sina hyana n\'f3rello?\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Ar quentes senna: \'93\'c1 orta ar mena; savielyanen ac\'e1miel m\'e1le.\'94\
	
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre anes maqu\'e9tina lo i Farisar pa i l\'fame yasse Eruo aranie tulumne, quentes t\'e9na hanquentasse: \'93Eruo aranie ua tule mi l\'e9 l\'e1vala quenin cenitas hendultanten. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Ente, queni uar quetuva: 'Cena sisse!' hya 'Tasse!' An y\'e9, Eruo aranie ea endeldasse.\'94\
	
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes i hildonnar: \'93Tuluvar aureli yassen meruvalde cene er i aurion i Atanyondova, mal ualde cenuva sa. 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Ar queni quetuvar lenna: 'Cena tasse!', hya: 'Cena sisse!' \'c1va lelya tar ar \'e1va nore ca te.\
\

\f2\i\b 15
\f3\b0  One among them returned when he saw that he was healed, and in a great voice he gave glory to God. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  And he fell upon his face before Jesus' feet and thanked him; he was a Samaritan man. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said: \'93Were not the ten healed? Where, then, are the other nine? 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  Was there no one who returned to give glory to God, except this man from another nation?\'94 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  And he said to him: \'93Rise and go; by your faith you have received health.\'94\
	
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  But when he was asked by the Pharisees about the time when [
\f2\b yasse
\f3\b0  = in which] God's kingdom was going to come, he said to them in answer: \'93God's kingdom does not come in a manner allowing people to see it with their eyes. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  Furthermore, people will not say: 'See here!' or 'There!' For behold, God's kingdom exists in your midst.\'94\
	
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  Then he said to the disciples: \'93[There] will come days when you will wish to see one of the days of the Son of Man, but you will not see it. 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  And people will say to you: 'See there!' or 'See here!' Do not go there and do not run behind them.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  An ve i \'edta, caltala er rantallo nu menel hyana rantanna nu menel, sie i Atanyondo nauva. 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Mal minyave mauya sen perpere ole ar n\'e1ve qu\'e9rina oa lo *n\'f3nare sina. 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Ente, ve martane auressen Noaho, sie euva yando i Atanyondo auressen: 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Mantelte, suncelte, neri veryaner, nissi n\'e1ner vertaine, tenna i aure yasse Noah lende mir i marcirya, ar i oloire t\'fale ar nancarne te illi. 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  M\'ed imya l\'e9, ve martane auressen Loto: mantelte, suncelte, mancanelte, vancelte, empannelte, carastanelte. 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Mal i auresse yasse Lot ett\'fale Soromello, n\'e1re ar *ussar lantaner menello ar nancarne te illi. 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  M\'ed imya l\'e9 euva \'edre i Atanyondo nauva apantaina.\
	
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Enta auresse mauya i quenen t\'f3passe coaryava, ye same armaryar i coasse, l\'e1 mene undu tultien tai, ar mi imya l\'e9 mauya i quenen i restasse l\'e1 nanwene i natinnar ca se. \
\

\f2\i\b 24
\f3\b0  For like the flash [= lightening], shining from one part under heaven to another part under heaven, so the Son of Man will be. 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  But firstly it is necessary for him to suffer much and to be turned away by this generation. 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  Furthermore, like it happened in the days of Noah, so it will be also in the days of the Son of Man: 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  They ate, they drank, men married, women were given in marriage, until the day when Noah went into the ark, and hte flood came and destroyed them all. 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  In the same manner, as it happened in the days of Lot: they ate, they drank, they traded, they bought, they planted, they built. 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  But on the day when Lot went out from Sodom, fire and brimstone fell from heaven and destroyed them all. 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  In the same manner it will be when the Son of Man shall be revealed.\
	
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  In that day it is necessary for the person on top of his house, who has his goods in the house, not to go down to fetch them, and int he same manner it is necessary for the person in the field not to return to the things behind him.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Enyala Loto veri! 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Aiquenen ye cesta hepe cuilerya nauvas vanwa, mal qu\'e9n yen nas vanwa rehtuva sa. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Nyarin lenna: Mi enta l\'f3me atta euvat er caimasse; er nauva talaina, mal i exe nauva hehtaina. 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Euva n\'eds atta m\'falala i imya *mulmanen; er nauva talaina, mal i exe nauva hehtaina. [
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0 ] 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Ar hanquentasse quentelte senna: \'93Masse, Heru?\'94 Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Yasse i hroa ea, tasse i \uc0\u351 orni ocomuvar.\'94\
\cf0 \

\f2\i\b \cf2 32
\f3\b0  Recall the wife of Lot! 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  To anyone who seeks to keep his life it will be lost, but a person it is lost to, will save it. 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  I tell you: In that night two will be in one bed; one will be brought [along], but the other will be abandoned. 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  [There] will be two women grinding on the same mill; one will be brought along, but the other will be abandoned. [
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0 ] 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  And in answer they said to him: \'93Where, Lord?\'94 He said to them: \'93Where the body is, there the eagles will gather.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 18\

\f1\b0 T\'e1 nyarnes tien sestie pa i maure hyami\'e9va ar l\'e1 pusti\'e9va neve, 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93Ostosse enge n\'e1mo ye ua s\'e1me rucie Eruva ar ua s\'e1me \'e1ya atanen. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Mal enge *verul\'f3ra n\'eds sana ostosse ar t\'fales i n\'e1monna, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1nin anta failie cotumonyallo \uc0\u351 anyesse!\'94\

\f3\i \

\f2\b CHAPTER 18\

\f3\b0 Then he told them a comparision about the need of praying and not stop trying, 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  saying: \'93In a city [there] was a judge who did nto have fear of God and did not have respect for [any] man. 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  But [there] was a widowed woman in that city and she came to the judge, saying: \'93Give me justice from my opponent at law!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Mal ter l\'fame uas merne, mal epeta quentes insenna: \'93\'d3mu uan ruce Erullo hya same \'e1ya atanen, 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  en taluvan failie n\'eds sinan, hya tuluvas ni-petien i cendelesse!\'94 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  T\'e1 i Heru quente: \'93Hlara ya \'fafaila n\'e1mo sina qu\'e9ta! 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Ma Eru ua tyaruva failie n\'e1ve carna in ic\'edlies i yamir senna mi aure yo l\'f3me, \'f3mu samis c\'f3le pa te? 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Nyarin lenna, antuvas ten failie rato! Ananta, \'edre i Atanyondo tuluva, ma hiruvas i savie cemende?\'94\
	
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Yando quentes sestie sina innar n\'e1ner tance pa v\'e9ra failielta ar nonter i exi ve munta: 
\f0\b 10 
\f1\b0 \'93N\'e9r atta lendet ama mir i corda hyamien. Er n\'e1ne Farisa ar er n\'e1ne *tungwemo. \
\

\f2\i\b 4
\f3\b0  But for [
\f2\b ter
\f3\b0 , through] a time he did not want, but thereafter he said to himself: \'93Though I do not fear God or have respect for [any] man, 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  I will still bring justice to this woman, or she will come and strike me in the face!\'94 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  Then the Lord said: \'93Hear what this unjust judge is saying! 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  Will God not cause justice to be done to those that he has chosen that cry to him at day and night, though he has patience concerning them? 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  I tell you, he will give them justice soon! And yet, when the Son of Man shall come, will he find the faith on earth?\'94\'94\
	
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  He also spoke this comparison to [those] that were certain about their own justice and counted the others as nothing: 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  \'93Two men went up into the temple to pray. One was a Pharisee and one was a tax collector. \

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  I Farisa tarne eressea ar hyamne sie: 'A Eru, antan lyen hantale pan uan ve hyane atani, pilur, \'fafailar, queni i racir vestale, hya ve *tungwemo sina. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  *Avamatin l\'fa atta i otsolasse, ar ilye nation yar \'f1etin antan quaista.' 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Mal i *tungwemo yando ua merne orta henyat menelenna, mal palpanes ambosterya, qu\'e9tala: 'A Eru, \'f3rava nisse, \'facarindo!' 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Quetin lenna: N\'e9r sina lende marda n\'e1la faila l\'e1 i exe, an ilquen ye orta inse nauva nucumna, mal s\'e9 ye nucume inse nauva ortaina.\'94\
	
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  S\'ed queni taller senna vinimoltar appieryan te, mal \'edre i hildor cenner sa, naityaneltet. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus yalle te ar quente: \'93Lava i h\'ednain tule ninna, ar \'e1va pusta te, an Eruo aranie taitin n\'e1. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna: Aiquen ye ua came Eruo aranie ve h\'edna, laume tuluva mir sa.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 11
\f3\b0  The Pharisee stood alone and prayed thus: 'O God, I give you thanks since I am not like other men, robbers, unrighteous ones, people who violate marriage, or like this tax collector. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  I fast two times in a week, and of all things that I get I give a tenth [/tithes].' 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  But the tax collector also [/even] did not wish to raise his eyes towards heaven, but he beat his breast, saying: 'O God, have mercy on me, a sinner!' 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  I say to you: This man went home being more righteous than the other, for everyone that exalts himself will be humbled, but he who humbles himself will be exalted.\'94\
	
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  Now people brought to him their babies for him to touch them, but when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  But Jesus called them and said: \'93Allow the children to come to me, and do not stop them, for God's kingdom is for suchlike ones. Truly I say to you: Anyone who does not receive God's kingdom as a child [does], will by no means come into it.\'94\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ar er i c\'e1noron maquente senna: \'93Mane *peantar, mana caruvan n\'e1ve aryon oira coivi\'e9no?\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Manen n\'e1 i estal n\'ed mane? *\'daquen n\'e1 mane hequa er, Eru. 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Istal i canwar: \'c1va race vestale. \'c1va nahta. \'c1va pile. \'c1va *vetta hurunen. \'c1 anta alcar atarelyan ar amillelyan.\'94 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes: \'93Ilye nati sine eh\'e9pien et n\'e9\uc0\u351 ello.\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Hl\'e1rala ta, Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Ea en er nat ya penil. Vaca ilqua ya samil ar etsata i telpe penyain, ar samuval harma menelde; t\'e1 tula ar \'e1ni hilya.\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  \'cdre hlasses ta, s\'e1mes tumna ny\'e9re, an anes ita l\'e1rea. \
	
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus yente se ar quente: \'93Manen urda n\'e1 in samir telpe tule mir Eruo aranie! 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  \'c9 ulumpen autie ter nelmo assa n\'e1 *a\uc0\u351 c\'e1rima l\'e1 tulie mir Eruo aranie l\'e1rea quenen.\'94\
\
	
\f2\i\b 18
\f3\b0  And one of the rulers said asked him: \'93Good teacher, what am I to do to be heir to eternal life?\'94 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  Jesus said to him: \'93How is [it] that you call me good? No one is good except one, God. 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  You know the commandments: Do not violate [lit. break] marriage. Do not kill. Do not steal. Do not witness with a lie. Give glory to your fatehr and to your mother.\'94 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  Then he said: \'93All these things I have kept from youth.\'94 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  Hearing that, Jesus said to him: \'93[There] is still one thing that you lack. Sell everything that you have and distribute the money to poor ones, and you will have a treasure in heaven; then come and follow me.\'94 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  When he heard that, he had deep grief, for he was very rich.\
	
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  Jesus look at him and said: \'93How difficult [it] is for [those] that have money to come into God's kingdom! Indeed for a camel to pass through a needle's eye [lit. hole] is easier than coming into God's kingdom for a rich person!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  I hlasser ta quenter: \'93T\'e1 man pole n\'e1ve rehtaina?\'94 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Eques: \'93I \'fac\'e1rimar atanin nar c\'e1rime Erun.\'94 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Mal eque P\'e9ter: \'93Y\'e9, ehehtielme v\'e9re natilmar ar ih\'edlier lye.\'94 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lenna, ea \'faner ye ehehtie coa hya veri hya h\'e1nor hya nostaru Eruo aranien 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  ye ua *nancamuva rimbe l\'fali amba l\'fame sinasse, ar i t\'falala randasse oira coivie.\'94\

\f0\b 	31
\f1\b0  T\'e1 talles i yunque oa v\'e9ra n\'f3menna ar quente t\'e9na: \'93Y\'e9! M\'e9nalve ama Yerusalemenna, ar ilye i nati t\'e9cine lo i Eruterc\'e1nor pa i Atanyondo nauvar telyaine. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  An nauvas antaina ollo quellin i n\'f3rion ar perperuva yaiwe ar orme, ar mo piutuva senna, 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  ar apa riptie se nahtuvaltes, mal i neldea auresse ortuvas.\'94 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Mal hanyanelte munta sine nation, mal quetie sina n\'e1ne nurtaine tello, ar ualte sinte i nati qu\'e9tine.\
\

\f2\i\b 26
\f3\b0  [Those] that heard that said: \'93Then who can be saved?\'94 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  He said: \'93The impossible things to men are possible to God.\'94 
\f2\b 28 
\f3\b0 But Peter said: \'93Behold, we have abandoned our own things and have followed you.\'94 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  He said to him: \'93Truly I say to you, there is no man who has abandoned house or wife or brothers or parents for [the sake of] God's kingdom 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  who will not receive back many times more in this time, and in the coming age eternal life.\'94\
	
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  Then he brought the twelve away to a private place and said to them: \'93Behold! We are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things written by the prophets about the Son of Man will be completed. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  For he will be given over to people of the nations and will suffer mockery and violence, and one will spit upon him, and after flaying him they will kill him, but on the third day he will rise.\'94 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  But they understood nothing of these things, but this saying was hidden from them, and they did not know the things said.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 35 
\f1\b0 S\'ed, \'edre t\'fales hare Yericonna, *c\'e9nel\'f3ra n\'e9r hamne ara i malle, \'edquala. 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Pan hlasses i \uc0\u351 anga l\'e9va, maquentes pa mana si tenge. 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Nyarnelte sen: \'93Y\'e9sus N\'e1saretello langea!\'94 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e1mes, qu\'e9tala: \'93Y\'e9sus Lavirion, \'f3rava nisse!\'94 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Ar i lender opo Y\'e9sus naityaner se, n\'e1veryan quilda, mal ta ole ambe y\'e1mes: \'93Lavirion, \'f3rava nisse!\'94 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus pustane ar canne i tulyumnelte i ner senna. Apa t\'fales hare, Y\'e9sus quente: 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  \'93Mana meril i caruvan lyen?\'94 Eques: \'93Heru, \'e1nin lave came *c\'e9ne!\'94 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Ar eque Y\'e9sus: \'93Cama *c\'e9ne; savielyanen ac\'e1miel *c\'e9ne.\'94 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  Ar mi imya l\'fa camnes *c\'e9ne, ar hilyanes Y\'e9sus, antala alcar Erun. Ar i quanda lie, c\'e9nala ta, antane laitale Erun.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 35
\f3\b0  Now, when he came near to Jericho, a blind man sat by the road, begging. 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  Since he hard the crowd on the move, he asked about what this meant. 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  They told him: \'93Jesus from Nazareth is passing by!\'94 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  And he cried [out], saying: \'93Jesus son of David, have mercy on me!\'94 
\f2\b 39 
\f3\b0 And those that went in front of Jesus rebuked him, for him to be silent, but that much more he cried: \'93Son of David, have mercy on me!\'94 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  Then Jesus stopped and commanded that they were to bring the man to him. After he came near, Jesus said: 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  \'93What do you want that I am to do for you?\'94 He said: \'93Lord, allow me to receive sight!\'94 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  And Jesus said: \'93Receive sight; by your faith you have received sight.\'94
\f2\b 43
\f3\b0  And in the same moment he received sight, and he followed Jesus, giving glory to God. And the entire people, seeing that, gave praise to God.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 19 \

\f1\b0 Ar \'edre t\'fales mir i osto, lendes ter Yerico. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Ar enge tasse n\'e9r yeo esse n\'e1ne Saccaio, ar anes h\'e9ra *tungwemo ar l\'e1rea. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Ar n\'e9ves cene Y\'e9sus, mal uas polle i \uc0\u351 anyenen, an \'fanes halla.\
	
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Ar n\'f3rala n\'f3vo n\'f3menna epe te, rentes mir vilwarinda alda, cenien se, an Y\'e9sus langumne sana n\'f3me. 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre t\'fales tar, Y\'e9sus yente ama ar quente: \'93Sakkaio, tula undu linti\'e9nen, an s\'edra mauya nin lemya coalyasse!\'94 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Ar t\'fales lintave undu ar camne se mi alasse. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre illi cenner sa, anelte nurrula, qu\'e9tala: \'93As n\'e9r ye n\'e1 \'facarindo lendes minna matien.\'94 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Mal Saccaio oronte ar quente i Herunna: \'93Y\'e9, i perta armanyaron antuvan i penyain, ar qui maustanen nampen telpe ho aiquen, *nanantuvan l\'far canta i nonwe!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 19\

\f3\b0 And when he came into the city, he went through Jericho. And [there] was there a man whose name was Zacchaeus, and he was a chief tax collector and rich. 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  And he tried to see Jesus, but he could not because of the crowd, and he was not tall.\
	
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  And running beforehand to a place before them, he climbed into a sycamore tree, to see him, for Jesus was going to pass by that place. 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  And when he came thither, Jesus looked up and said: \'93Zacchaeus, come down quickly [lit. with speed], for today it is necessary for me to stay in your house!\'94 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  And he came quickly down and received him with [lit. in] joy. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  And when all saw it, they were murmuring, saying: \'93With a man who is a sinner he went in to eat.\'94 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  But Zacchaeus arose and said to the Lord: \'93Behold, half of my goods I will give to the poor, and if by compulsion I took money from anyone, I will give back four times the sum!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93S\'edra rehtie ut\'falie coa sinanna, an yando s\'e9 n\'e1 Avraham yondo. 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  An i Atanyondo t\'fale cestien ar rehtien ya n\'e1ne vanwa.\'94\
	
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  \'cdre lastanelte sine natinnar yando quentes t\'e9na sestie, pan anes hare Yer\'fasalemenna, ar sannelte i Eruo aranie tanumne insa tasse ar t\'e1. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Etta quentes: \'93N\'e9r, aryon, lelyumne haira n\'f3renna camien aranie ar epeta nanwenien. 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Yalles m\'f3li quean ar antane tien \ul minar\ulnone  quean ar canne tien: '\'c1 manca tainen tenna tuluvan.' 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Mal n\'f3reryo queni t\'e9ver se ar mentaner ca se quelli i \
carpumner tien, quetien: 'Ualme mere n\'e9r sina ve aran or me.'\
	
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Ar t\'fale \'edre nanwennes, apa camie i aranie, i cannes i yalumnelte senna m\'f3li sine in antanes i telpe, istieryan mana \'f1entelte mancal\'e9nen.\
\

\f2\i\b 9
\f3\b0  Then Jesus said to him: \'93Today salvation has come to this house, for also he is a son of Abraham. 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  For the Son of Man came to seek and to save [that] which was lost.\'94\
	
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  While they listened to these things he also told them a comparison, since he was near to Jerusalem, and they thought that God's kingdom was going to show itself there and then. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  Therefore he said: \'93A man, an heir, was going to travel to a remote land to receive a kingdom and thereafter to return. 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  He called ten servants and gave them ten \ul minas\ulnone  and commanded them: 'Trade with them until I shall come.' 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  But people of his land hated him and sent behind him people that were going to speak for them, to say: 'We do not want this man as king over us.'\
	
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  And [it] happened [lit. came] when he returned, after receiving the kingdom, that he commanded that they were to call to him these thralls that he gave the money to, for him to know what they got by trade.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  T\'e1 i minya t\'fale ar quente: \'93Heru, \ul mina\ulnone lya \'f1ente \ul minar\ulnone  quean!\'94 
\f0\b 17 
\f1\b0 Etta quentes senna: \'93Mai carna, m\'e1ra m\'f3l! Pan anaiel voronda m\'ed ampitya nat, sama t\'fare or ostor quean.\'94 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ar i attea t\'fale, qu\'e9tala: \'93\ul Mina\ulnone lya, heru, carne \ul minar\ulnone  lempe!\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Quentes yando n\'e9r sinanna: 'T\'e1 elye tura ostor lempe!' 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Mal i exe t\'fale, qu\'e9tala: 'Heru, sisse ea \ul mina\ulnone lya, ya eh\'e9pien caitala mi lanne. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  An runcen lyello, pan nalye naraca n\'e9r; mapal ama ya ual panyane undu ar *cirihtal ya ual rende.' 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Quentes senna: \'93Et v\'e9ra antolyallo n\'e1man lye, olca m\'f3l! Sintel i nanye naraca n\'e9r ye mapa ya uan panyane undu ar *cirihta ya uan rende? 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  T\'e1 manen n\'e1 i ual panya telpenya sarnosse? T\'e1, \'edre t\'falen, camumnenyes as nap\'e1nina nonwe.'\
\

\f2\i\b 16
\f3\b0  Then the first came and said: \'93Lord, your mina gained ten minas!\'94 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  Therefore he said to him: \'93Well done, good slave! Since you have been faithful in the smallest thing, have power over ten cities.\'94 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  And the second came, saying: \'93Your mina, lord, made five minas!\'94 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  He said also to this man: 'Then you rule five cities!' 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  But the other came, saying: 'Lord, here is your mina, which I have kept lying in a cloth. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  For I feared you, since you are a harsh man; you take up what you did not put down and you reap what you did not sow.' 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  He said to him: 'Out of your own mouth I am judging you, wicked slave! You knew that I am a harsh man who take up what I did not put down and reap what I did not sow? 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  Then how is [it] that you did not put my money on a table? Then, when I came, I was going to receive it with an added sum.'\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Ar quentes innar tarner ara se: '\'c1 mapa i \ul mina\ulnone  sello ar \'e1sa anta yen same i \ul minar\ulnone  quean!' 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Mal quentelte senna: 'Heru, samis \ul minar\ulnone  quean!' 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  'Quetin lenna: Ilquenen ye same, amba nauva antaina, mal yen ua same, yando ya samis nauva mapaina oa. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Ente, \'f1ottonyar sine i uar merne ni ve aranelta \'96 \'e1te tala sir ar \'e1te nahta epe hendunyat!'\'94\
	
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Sie, apa quentes nati sine, lendes opo te Yer\'fasalemenna. 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre t\'fales hare Vet-Fahenna ar Vetanianna i orontesse estaina Oron *Milpieron, etementanes atta i hildoron, 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93Mena mir i osto epe let! \'cdre tuliste tar, hiruvaste *pellope n\'fatina, yesse *\'faquen atanion oi ah\'e1mie. \'c1se lehta ar \'e1se tala! 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Mal qui aiquen quete lenta: 'Mana castasta lehtien se?', aste quete: I Heru same maure seva.\'94\
\
	
\f2\i\b 24
\f3\b0  And he said to those that stood by him: 'Take the mina from him and give it to [the one] who has the ten minas!' 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  But they said to him: 'Lord, he has ten minas!' 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  'I say to you: To everyone that has, more will be given, but to [the one] that does not have, also what he has will be taken away. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  Furthermore, these enemies of mine that did not want me as their king \'96 bring them here and slay them before my eyes!'\'94\
	
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  Thus, after he said these things, he went in front of them towards Jerusalem. 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  And when he came near to Bethphage and Bethany on the mountain called Mount of Olives, he sent froth two of the disciples, 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  saying: \'93Go into the city before you! [dual] When you [dual] come thither, you will find a colt bound, that no one has ever sat upon. Loose it and bring it! 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  But if anyone says to you: 'What is your reason for loosing it?', you are to say: The Lord has need of it.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Ar i n\'e1net etementaine hirnet se aqua ve quentes t\'fana. 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre lehtanette i *pellope, i haryaner se quenter t\'fana: \'93Mana castasta lehtien i *pellope?\'94 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Quentette: \'93I Heru same maure seva.\'94 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Ar tulyanettes Y\'e9sunna, ar hantette collattar i *pellopenna ar panyanet Y\'e9sus sesse.\
	
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Mi levierya ompa queni pantaner collaltar i mallesse. 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  \'cdre t\'fales hare i pendenna undu Orontello *Milpieron i quanda liy\'fame i hildoron *yestaner same alasse ar laita Eru pa ilye i t\'farie cardar yar cennelte, 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93Aistana n\'e1 ye t\'fala, i Aran, m\'ed H\'e9ruo esse. Raine menelde, ar alcar i tarmenissen!\'94 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Mal quelli i Farisaron i \uc0\u351 angallo quenter senna: \'93*Peantar, \'e1 naitya hildolyar!\'94 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Mal hanquentasse quentes: \'93Nyarin lenna: Qui queni sine n\'e1ner quilde, i sarni yamumner!\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 32
\f3\b0  And [the two] that were sent forth found it just as he said to them [dual]. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  But when they loosed the cold, [those] that owned it said to them: \'93What is your reason for loosing the colt?\'94 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  They said: \'93The Lord has need of it.\'94 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  And they led it to Jesus, and they threw their cloaks upon the colt and put Jesus on it.\
	
\f2\b 36 
\f3\b0 As he moved [lit. in his moving] forward people spread their cloaks on the road. 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  When he came near to the decline down from the Mount of Olives the entire host of the disciples began to have joy and to praise God concerning all the mighty deeds that they saw, 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  saying: \'93Blessed is [he] who is coming, the King, in the name of the Lord. Peace on earth, and glory in the high places!\'94 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  But some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to him: \'93Teacher, rebuke your disciples!\'94 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  But in answer he said: \'93I tell you: If these people were silent, the stones would cry [out]!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre t\'fales hare ar cenne i osto, n\'ederyar uller san, 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  ar quentes: \'93Nai elye sinte mi aure sina yar tulyar rainenna! Mal s\'ed anaielte nurtaine hendulyalto. 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  An tuluvar aureli yassen \'f1ottolyar peluvar lye caraxenen ar niruvar lyenna ilye tiellon, 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  ar hatuvalte ly\'e9 ar h\'ednalyar talamenna, ar ualte lavuva ondon lemya ondosse lyesse, pan ualye sinte i l\'fame yasse anel c\'e9\uc0\u351 ina!\'94\
	
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  Ar t\'falala mir i corda *yestanes et-hate i vancer, 
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  qu\'e9tala t\'e9na: \'93Anaie t\'e9cina: 'Ar coanya nauva coa hyami\'e9va', mal elde carir sa felya piluron!\'94\
	
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  Ar peantanes ilya auresse i cordasse. Mal i h\'e9re *airimor ar i parmagolmor ar i lieo mindar cestaner nancare se, 
\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  ananta ualte hirne mana carumnelte, an i quanda lie himyane se lastien.\
\

\f2\i\b 41
\f3\b0  And when he came near and saw the city, his tears flowed for it, 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  and he said: \'93Would that you knew in this day [the things] that lead to peace! But now they have been hidden from your eyes [dual]. 
\f2\b 43
\f3\b0  For [there] will come days when your enemies will surround you with a palisade and will press towards you from all directions, 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  and they will throw you and your children to earth, and they will not allow [any] stone to remain upon a stone in you, since you did not know the time when you were inspected!\'94\
	
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  And coming into the temple he began to throw out [those] who sold [things], 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  saying to them: \'93It has been written: 'And my house will be a house of prayer', but you make it a cave of robbers!\'94\
	
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  And he taught every day in the temple. But the chielf priests and the scribes and the prominent ones of the people sought to destroy him, 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  and yet they did not find what to do [lit. what they were going to do], for the entire people stuck to him to listen.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 20\

\f1\b0 Ar martane mi er i aurion, \'edre s\'e9 peantane i lien i cordasse ar carne i evandilyon sinwa, i t\'faler senna i h\'e9re *airimor ar i amy\'e1rar 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  ar quenter senna: \'93Queta men mana t\'farenen c\'e1ral nati sine, ar man \'e1nie lyen t\'fare sina!\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse quentes t\'e9na: \'93Yando inye maquetuva lenna pa nat, ar alde hanquete ninna: 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Yoh\'e1no *tumyale, ma anes et menello hya atanillon?\'94 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  T\'e9 caramper mici inte ar quenter: \'93Qui quetilve: Et menello, quetuvas: T\'e1 manen n\'e1 i ualde s\'e1ve sesse? 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Mal qui quetilve: Atanillon, i quanda lie vi-nahtuva sarninen, an savilte tancave i Yoh\'e1no n\'e1ne Eruterc\'e1no.\'94 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Sie quentelte i ualte sinte. 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Ar eque Y\'e9sus: \'93T\'e1 yando inya ua quetuva lenna mana t\'farenen carin nati sine.\'94\
	
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Ar *yestanes quete sestie sina i lienna: \'93N\'e9r empanne tarwa liantassion ar l\'e1ver *alamolin *yuhta sa telpen, ar lendes hyana n\'f3renna anda l\'famen. \
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 20\

\f3\b0 And it happened in one of the days, when he instructed the people in the temple and made the gospel known, that [there] came to him the chief priests and the elders 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  and said to him: \'93Say us by [-
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] what authority you are doing these things, and who has given you this authority!\'94 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  In answer he said to them: \'93I too will ask you about [some]thing, and you answer me: 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  John's baptism, was it out of heaven or from men?\'94 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  They spoke among themselves and said: \'93If we say: Out of heaven, he will say: Then how is [it] that you did not believe in him? 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  But if we say: From men, the entire people will kill us with stones, for they believe firmly that John was a prophet.\'94 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  Thus they said that they did not know. 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  And Jesus said: \'93Then I as well will not tell you by what authority I to these things.\'94\
	
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  And he began to speak this comparison to the people: \'93A man planted a garden of vines and allowed some cultivators to use it for money, and he went to another land for a long time.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 	10
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre i l\'fame t\'fale, mentanes m\'f3l i *alamonnar, antieltan sen i y\'e1veo i tarwallo liantassion. Mal i *alamor, apa palpie se, mentaner se oa lusta. 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Mal mentanes yando hyana m\'f3l. Yando s\'e9 mentanelte oa, apa palpie se ar nucumie se. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ananta ata mentanes neldea; yando s\'e9 hantelte ettenna, apa harnie se. 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quente i heru ye s\'e1me i tarwa lantassion: 'Mana caruvan? Mentuvan melda yondonya; sen samuvalte \'e1ya.' 
\f0\b 14 
\f1\b0 \'cdre i *alamor cenner se, carampelte mici inte ar quenter: 'Ta n\'e1 i aryon! Alve nahta se, ar elme haryuvar masserya!' 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Ar hanteltes et i tarwallo lantassion ar nacanter se. T\'e1 mana caruva i heru ye same i tarwa? 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Tuluvas ar metyuva tane *alamor ar antuva i tarwa exelin.\'94 \'cdre hlasselte ta, quentelte: \'93Nai uas oi martuva!\'94\
\
	
\f2\i\b 10
\f3\b0  And when the time came, he sent a slave to the cultivators, for them to give him of the fruit from the garden of vines. But the cultivators, after beating him, sent him away empty. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  But he sent also another slave. Him as well they sent away, after beating him and humiliating him. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  And yet he again sent a third; him as well they threw outside, after wounding him. 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  Then the lord who had the garden of wines said: 'What am I to do? I will send my beloved son; for him they will have awe.' 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  When the cultivators saw him, they spoke among themselves and said: 'That is the heir! Let us kill him, and we will possess his portion!' 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  And they threw him out of the garden of vines and killed him. Then what will the lord who has the garden do? 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  He will come and put an end to those cultivators and will give the garden to others.\'94 When they heard that, they said: \'93May it not ever happen!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Mal ata yenteset ar quente: \'93T\'e1 mana tea nat sina ya n\'e1 t\'e9cina: 'I ondo ya i \uc0\u351 amnor querner oa, s\'e1 anaie carna cas i vinco' \'96 ? 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ilquen ye lanta tana ondonna nauva r\'e1cina. Aiquen yenna lantas, ascatuvas se.\'94 
\f0\b \cf0 19
\f1\b0  Ar i parmangolmor ar i h\'e9re *airimor cestaner panya m\'e1ltat senna yana l\'famesse, mal runcelte i liello. An hanyanelte i nyarnes sestie sina pa t\'e9. 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ar apa tirneltes harive mentanelte nelli i nuldave camner telpe lengien ve qui anelte faile, nevien mapa se questasse, antieltan se oa in turner ar i mir i n\'f3rec\'e1no t\'fare. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Ar maquentelte senna: \'93*Peantar, istalme i quetil ar peantal ve nanwa n\'e1, ar ua valda lyen man qu\'e9n n\'e1, mal peantal Eruo malle i nanwi\'e9nen. 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Ma lertalve paitya *tungwe i Ingaranen hya l\'e1?\'94 \
\

\f2\i\b 17
\f3\b0  But again he looked at them and said: \'93Then what does this thing mean that is written: 'The stone which the builders turned away, it has been made head of the corner' \'96 ? 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  Everyone that falls against that stone will be broken. Anyone upon whom it falls, it will smash him.\'94 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  And the scribes and the chief priests sought to put their hands upon him in that hour, but they feared the people. For they understood that he told this comparison about them. 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  And after they watched him closely they sent some men [
\f2\b ner-li
\f3\b0  > 
\f2\b nelli
\f3\b0 ] that secretly received money to behave as if they were just, to try to catch him in speech, for them to give him over to those who ruled and into the power of the governor. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  And they asked him: \'93Teacher, we know that you speak and teach as is true, and it is not important to you who a person is, but you teach God's way by the truth. 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  May we pay tax to the High King or not?\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Mal t\'fanes curulta ar quente t\'e9na: 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  \'93\'c1nin tana \ul len\'e1r\ulnone . Mano emma ar tecie samis?\'94 Quentelte: \'93I ingarano.\'94 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na; \'93Alde *nananta, t\'e1, i Ingarano nati i Ingaranen, ar Eruo nati Erun.\'94 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Ar ua ence tien mapa se mi quetie sina epe i lie, mal quentelte munta, elmendasse hanquentaryanen.\
	
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Mal quelli i Farisaron, i quetir i ua ea *enortale, t\'faler ar maquenter senna: 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  \'93*Peantar, M\'f3ses et\'e9cie men: 'Qui nero h\'e1no quale \'fa h\'edno, apa veryanes n\'eds, mauya h\'e1noryan verya i nissenna ar orta erde h\'e1noryan.' 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Mal enger h\'e1nor otso, ar i minya veryane nissenna, ono qualle \'fa h\'edno. 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Yando i attea 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  ar i neldea veryaner senna, m\'ed imya l\'e9 ilye i otso \'fa h\'edno hilien te, ar quallelte. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  M\'ed metta yando i n\'eds qualle. 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Mano veri t\'e1 nauvas i *enortalesse? An anes veri ilye i otson.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 23
\f3\b0  But he perceived their cunning and said to them: 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  \'93Show me a denarius. Whose picture and writing does it have?\'94 They said: \'93The High King's.\'94 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  And he saiad to them: \'93You are to give back, then, the High King's things to the High King, and God's things to God.\'94 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  And it was not possible for them to seize him in this saying before the people, but they said nothing, in wonder at [
\f2\b -nen
\f3\b0 ] his answer.\
	
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  But some of the Pharisees, that say that [there] is not [any] resurrection, came and said to him: 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  \'93Teacher, Moses has written for us: 'If a man's brother dies without child, after he married a woman, it is necessary for his brother to get married to the woman and rise up seed for his brother.' 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  But [there] were seven brothers, and the first got married to a woman, but died without child. 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  Also the second 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  and the third got married to her, in the same manner all the seven without a child to follow them, and they died. 
\f2\b 32 
\f3\b0 In the end also the woman died. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  Whose wife will she then be in the resurrection? For she was a wife for all the seven.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Randa sino h\'ednar veryar ar nar vertaine, 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  mal i nar n\'f3tine valdie enta randan ar i *enortalen qualinillon uar verya hya nar vertaine. 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Ente, ualte pole ambe quale, an nalte ve valar, pan nalte Eruo h\'edni n\'e1venen i *enortaleo h\'edni. 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Mal yando M\'f3ses tanne qualini nar ortaine, i nyarnasse i neceltusso, \'edre estas i H\'e9ru Aino Avrah\'e1mo ar Aino \'cdsaco ar Aino Y\'e1covo. 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Uas qualinion Aino, mal coivearon, an illi mici te nar coivie sen.\'94
\f0\b  39
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse quelli i parmangolmoron quenter: \'93*Peantar, carampel mai!\'94 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  An ualte ambe varyane maquete senna erya maquetie.\
\

\f2\i\b 34
\f3\b0  Jesus said to them: \'93The children of this age marry and are given in marriage, 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  but [those] that are counted worthy for that age and for the resurrection of the dead do not marry or are given in marriage. 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  Furthermore, they cannot [any]more die, for they are like angels, since they are children of God by being children of the resurrection. 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  But also Moses showed [the] dead are raised, in the story about the thorn-bush, when he calls the Lord Abraham's God and Isaac's God and Jacob's God. 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  He is not God of [the] dead, but of living ones, for all among them are alive to him.\'94 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  In answer some of the scribes said: \'93Teacher, you spoke well!\'94 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  And they did not [any]more dare to ask him a single question.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Mal quentes t\'e9na: \'93Manen n\'e1 i quetilte i n\'e1 i Hristo Laviro yondo? 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  An Lavir immo quete i parmasse airil\'edrion: I H\'e9ru quente herunyanna: Hara ara formanya, 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  tenna panyuvan \'f1ottolyar nu talulyat. 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  Sie Lavir esta se heru. T\'e1 manen n\'e1se yondorya?\'94 \
	
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  \'cdre i quanda lie lastane, quentes hildoryannar: 
\f0\b 46 
\f1\b0 \'93Tira inde i parmangolmoin i merir vanta mi larmar ar melir *suilier i mancan\'f3messen ar i minya sondar i *yomencoassen ar i minde n\'f3mi i ahtumattissen, 
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  ar i ammatir i coar *verul\'f3raiva ar hyamir ande hyamier n\'e1ven c\'e9nine lo exi. T\'e9 camuvar ambe lunga namie.\'94 \
\

\f2\i\b 41
\f3\b0  But he said to them: \'93How is [it] that they say that the Christ is David's son? 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  For David himself says in the book of psalms [
\f2\b airil\'edrion
\f3\b0  = of holy songs]: The Lord said to my lord: Sit by my right hand, 
\f2\b 43
\f3\b0  until I shall put your enemies under your feet. 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  Thus David calls him lord. Then how is he his son?\'94 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  While the entire people listened, he said to his disciples: 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  \'93Watch yourselves because of the scribes that wish to walk [around] in robes and live greetings in the market places and the first seats in the synagogues and the prominent places at the suppers, 
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  and that devour the houses of widows and pray long prayes to be seen by others. They will receive a heavier judgement.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 21 \

\f1\b0 S\'ed \'edre yentes cennes i l\'e1rear panyea annaltar i harwessen. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  T\'e1 cennes penya *verul\'f3ra n\'eds ye minahante pitye urustamitta atta, 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  ar eques: \'93Nyarin len n\'e1sie: Penya *verul\'f3ra n\'eds sina antane amba l\'e1 te illi. 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  An illi sine antaner annar et \'faveltallo, mal n\'eds sina antane i quanda laulesta ya s\'e1mes.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 21\

\f3\b0 Now when he looked he saw the rich putting their gifts in the treasuries. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  Then he saw a poor widowed woman who threw in two small copper pieces, 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  and he said: \'93I tell you truly: This poor widowed woman gave more than them all. 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  For all these [people] gave gifts out of their abundance, but this woman gave the entire livelihood that she had.\'94\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre quelli caramper pa i corda, i s\'e1mes \'edrime ondor ar n\'e1ne netyaina annal\'ednen, quentes: 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  \'93Nati sine yar y\'e9talde \'96 aureli tuluvar yassen ondo ua lemyuva ondosse ya ua nauva h\'e1tina undu.\'94\
	
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Ar maquentelte senna: \'93*Peantar, mana i l\'fa yasse nati sine euvar, ar mana i tanwa i nati sine rato martuvar?\'94 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Ar eques: \'93Cima i ualde nauva ty\'e1rine ranya! An rimbali tuluvar essenyasse, qu\'e9tala: Inye s\'e9!, ar: I l\'fame hare n\'e1. \'c1va lelya ca te! 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Ente, \'edre hlarilde pa ohtali ar amorti\'e9li, \'e1va na ruhtaine! An mauya i nati sine tuluvar minyave, mal i metta ua tule m\'ed imya l\'fame.\'94\
	\
	
\f2\i\b 5
\f3\b0  And when some talked about the temple, that it had lovely stones and was adorned with gifts, he said: 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  \'93These things that you behold \'96 days will come when stone will not remain upon a stone that will not be thrown down.\'94\
	
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  And they asked him: \'93Teacher, what is the time when these things will be, and what [is] the sign that these things will soon happen?\'94 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  And he said: \'93Take heed that you will not be caused to stray! For numerous ones will come in my name, saying: I am he!, and: The time is near. Do not go after [lit. behind] them! 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  Furthermore, when you hear about wars and uprisings, do not be terrified! For it is necessary that these things will come first, but the end does not come at the same time.\

\f1\i0 	\
	
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93N\'f3re ortuva n\'f3renna ar aranie aranienna, 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  ar euvar *cempali\'e9li, ar mi n\'f3me apa n\'f3me quol\'favi\'e9li ar saicel\'e9li, ar euvar r\'facime natali c\'e9nine, ar menello t\'fare tanwali. \
	
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Mal n\'f3 ilye nati sine queni panyuvar m\'e1ltat lesse ar roituvar le, antala le olla i *yomencoain ar i mandoin, \'edre nalde t\'facine epe arani ar n\'f3rec\'e1nor pa essenya. 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Ta nauva len ecie *vettien. 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Etta na tance endaldasse i ualde caruva panor n\'f3vo pa manen quetuvalde inden, 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  an inye antuva len anto ar sailie yanna ilye cotumaldar uar poluva tare hya quete. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Ente, nauvalde antaine olla yando lo nostaru ar lo h\'e1nor ar lo nosselda ar lo meldor, ar nahtuvalte quelli mici le, 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  ar nauvalde t\'e9vine lo illi essenyanen. 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Ananta fine careldasse laume nauva nancarna. 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Voronweldanen rehtuvalde coivieldar. \
\
	
\f2\i\b 10
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  and there will be earthquakes, and in place after place pestilences and famines, and [there] will be terrible things seen, and from heaven great signs.\
	
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  But before all these things people will put their hands [dual] on you and will persecute you, giving you over to the synagogues and to the prisons, when you are drawn before kings and governors concerning my name. 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  That will be for you an opportunity for witnessing. 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  Therefore be firm in your heart that you will not make plans beforehand about how you will speak for yourselves, 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  for I shall give you a mouth and wisdom against which all [of] your enemies will not be able to stand or speak. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  Furthermore, you will be given over by parents [dual] and by brothers and by your kin and by friends, and they will cill some among you, 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  and you will be hated by all because of [-
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] my name. 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  And yet a hair on your head will by no means be destroyed. 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  By your faithfulness you will save your lives. \

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ente, \'edre cenuvalde Yer\'fasalem p\'e9lina lo hosseli, \'e1 ista i nancarierya ut\'falie hare. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  T\'e1 mauya in ear Y\'fareasse u\uc0\u351 e i orontinnar, ar mauya in ear i osto endesse auta, ar in ear i m\'e9nassen l\'e1 lelya mina sa, 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  an ente auri nar auri ahtari\'e9va, carien nanwe ilye nati i anaier t\'e9cine. 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Horro in *lapsarwe nissin ar in *tyetir vinimor ente auressen! An tuluva t\'fara maure i n\'f3resse ar orme lie sinanna, 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  ar lantuvalte i macilden ar nauvar tulyaine oa mir ilye i n\'f3ri, ar Yer\'fasalem nauva *vattaina nu talu lo ilye i n\'f3ri, tenna i n\'f3rion l\'fami nauvar telyaine.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 20
\f0\i0  
\f3\i\b0 Furthermore, when you shall see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, know that her destruction has come near. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  Then it is necessary for [those] that are in Judea to flee to the mountains, and for [those] that are in the midst of the city to leave, and for [those] that are in the regions not to go into it, 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  for those days are days of vengeance, to make true all things that have been written. 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  Woe to the pregnant women and to those that suckle babies in those days! For [there] shall come a great need on the land and wrath upon this people, 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  and they shall fall by the sword and will be led away into all the nations, and Jerusalem will be trampled under foot [dual] by all the nations, until the times of the nations shall be completed.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Ente, euvar tanwali mi Anar ar I\uc0\u351 il ar eleni, ar cemende qu\'e1rele mici n\'f3ri yar uar cene u\u351 we, castanen ramo i earo ar amortieryo, 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  \'edre atani nauvar hlaiwe caurenen, apac\'e9nala i nati t\'falala ambarenna. An menelo t\'fari nauvar p\'e1line. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Ar t\'e1 cenuvalte i Atanyondo t\'fala fanyasse arwa t\'fareo ar t\'fara alcaro. 
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre nati sine *yestar marta, tara halle ar \'e1 orta carelda, an etelehtielda t\'fala hare. \
\

\f3\i Furthermore, there will be signs in Sun and Moon and stars, and on earth anxiety of nations that do not see [any] escape, by reason of the noise of the sea and its uprising, when men shall be sick with fear, foreseeing the things coming upon [the] world. For the powers of heaven will be shaken. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  And then they will see the Son of Man come in a cloud with power and great glory. 
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  But when these things begin to happen, stand tall [pl.] and raise your head, for your deliverance is coming near.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na sestie: \'93\'c1 tunta i *rely\'e1valda ar ilye i hyane aldar: 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Yando \'edre samilte tuimar, istalde inden cendi\'e9nen i s\'ed i laire hare n\'e1. 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Sie yando istuvalde, \'edre cenuvalde nati sine martea, i Eruo aranie hare n\'e1. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna: *N\'f3nare sina ua autuva n\'f3 ilye nati martuvar. 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Menel cemenye autuvat, mal ninye quettar uar oi autuva.\
	
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Mal cima inde, pustien endalda n\'e1vello lunga *accamati\'e9nen ar *accasuci\'e9nen ar qu\'e1rel\'e9nen coireo, ar rincanen enta aure tuluva lenna 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  ve remma. An tuluvas illinnar i marir pal\'faresse i quanda cemeno. 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Mal na coive, illume hy\'e1mala i poluvalde u\uc0\u351 e ilye nati sine yar tuluvar, ar tare epe i Atanyondo.\'94\
	
\f0\b 37 
\f1\b0 I auressen anes i cordasse, peantala, mal l\'f3misse etelendes ar marne i orontesse estaina Oron *Milpieron, 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  ar i quanda lie t\'fale arinyave senna i cordasse hlarien se.\

\f3\i \
	
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  And he spoke to them a comparison: \'93Notice the fig-tree and all the other trees: 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  Also [/even] when they have twigs, you know to yourselves by examining that now the summer is near. 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  Thus you will also know, when you shall see these things happen, that God's kingdom is near. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you: This generation will not pass before all things shall happen. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  Heaven and earth shall pass [dual], but my words will not ever pass [away].\
	
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  But watch yourselves, to stop your heart from being heavy with over-eating and over-drinking and the anxiety of life, and suddenly [
\f2\b rincanen:
\f3\b0  with a sudden move] that day will come upon you 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  like a snare. For it shall come upon all that dwell on the surface of the entire earth. 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  But be awake, always praying that you shall be able to excape all these things that will come, and stand before the Son of Man.\'94\
	
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  In the days he was in the temple, teaching, but at night he went out and stayed at the mountain called Mount of Olives, 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  and the entire people came early to him in the temple to hear him.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 22\

\f1\b0 S\'ed i a\uc0\u351 ar *Alapul\'fane Massaron, ya n\'e1 estaina Lahtie, n\'e1ne hare. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Ar i h\'e9re *airimor ar i parmangolmor cestaner manen pollelte nancaritas, pan runcelte i liello. 
\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Mal S\'e1tan lende mir Y\'faras, i qu\'e9n estaina Iscariot, ye n\'e1ne n\'f3tina im\'edca i yunque, 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  ar lendes oa ar quente as i h\'e9re *airimor ar i cordahestor pa manen antumneses olla tien. 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  T\'e1 anelte valime ar quenter i anelte m\'e9rala anta sen telpe. 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Ar quentes n\'e1 yan intyanelte ar cestane m\'e1ra l\'fa antien se olla \'edre ua enge \uc0\u351 anga aselte.\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 22\

\f3\b0 Now the festival of Unleavened Breads, which is called Passover, was near. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  And the chief priests and the scribes sought how they could destroy him, since they feared the people. 
\f2\b 3
\f3\b0  But Satan went into Judas, the one called Iscariot, who was counted among the twelve, 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  and he went away and spoke with the chief priests and the temple captains about how he was going to give him over to them. 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  Then they were happy and said that they were willing to give him money. 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  And he said yes to what they suggested and sought a good moment to give him over when [there] was not a crowd with them.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  S\'ed t\'fale i aure *alapul\'fane massaron, yasse mauyane nahta i eule lahti\'e9va, 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  ar mentanes P\'e9ter ar Yoh\'e1no, qu\'e9tala: \'93Mena ar \'e1ven manwa i lahtie, matielvan.\'94 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Quentette senna: \'93Masse meril i caruvammes manwa?\'94 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Quentes t\'fana: \'93Y\'e9, \'edre tuliste mir i osto, n\'e9r ye c\'f3la cemina vene veluva let. \'c1se hilya mir i coa mir ya menuvas. 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Ar atte quete yenna same i coa: \'93I *Peantar quete lyenna: Masse ea i n\'f3me yassen polin mate i lahtie as hildonyar?\'94 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Ar tana n\'e9r tanuva lent hoa  *sorostarwa oromar. \'c1 manwa tasse!\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Ar oantette ar hirne i nati ve quentes t\'fana, ar manwanette i lahtien.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 7
\f3\b0  Now came the day of unleavened breads, on which it was necessary to kill the lamb of passover, 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  and he sent Peter and John, saying: \'93Go and prepare for us the passover, for us to eat.\'94 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  They [dual] said to him: \'93Where do you wish that we [dual] are to make it ready?\'94 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  He said to them [dual]: \'93Behold, when you [dual] go into the city, a man who is carrying an earthen vessel will meet you [dual]. Follow him into the house into which he shall go. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  And you [dual] are to say to [him] who has the house: \'93The Teacher says to you: Where is the place where I can eat the passover with my disciples?\'94 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  And that man will show you [dual] a big furnished upper room. Prepare there!\'94 
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  And they [dual] went away and fount the things as he said to them [dual], and they [dual] prepared for the passover.\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre i l\'fame t\'fale, Y\'e9sus caine ara i sarno, ar i aposteli \'f3se. 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Ita em\'e9rien mate lahtie sina aselde n\'f3 perperin, 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  an quetin lenna: Uan matuva sa ata n\'f3 nauvas telyaina Eruo araniesse.\'94\
	
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Ar c\'e1mala yulma antanes hantale ar quente: \'93\'c1 mapa si ar \'e1sa menta quenello quenenna mici le. 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  An quetin lenna: Ho s\'ed uan sucuva ata i y\'e1vello i liantasseo n\'f3 Eruo aranie tuluva.\'94\
	
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Ente, nampes massa, antane hantale, rance sa ar quente: \'93Si n\'e1 hroanya, ya nauva antaina r\'e1 len. Cara si enyalien ni.\'94 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ar i yulma m\'ed imya l\'e9 apa mantelte i ahtumat, s\'e9 qu\'e9tala: \'93Yulma sina n\'e1 i vinya v\'e9re hroanyanen, ya nauva etulyaina r\'e1 len. \
	
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Mal y\'e9, *vartonyo m\'e1 n\'e1 asinye i sarnosse! 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  An i Atanyondo autea, ve n\'e1se martyaina; ananta horro i quenen ter ye n\'e1se antaina olla!\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Etta *yestanelte carpa mici inte pa man mici te n\'e1ne ye carumne nat sina. \
\

\f2\i\b 	14
\f3\b0  And when the time came, Jesus lay at the table, and the apostles with him. 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93I have much desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer, 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  for I say to you: I will not eat it again before it shall be completed in God's kingdom.\'94\
	
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  And receiving a cup he gave thanks and said: \'93Take this and send it from person to person among you. 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  For I say to you: From now I shall not drink from the fruit of the vine before God's kingdom shall come.\'94\
	
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  Furthermore, he took a bread, gave thanks, broke it and said: \'93This is my body, that will be given on your behalf. Do this to recall me.\'94 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  And the cup in the same manner after they ate the evening meal, he saying: \'93This cup is the new covenant by means of my body, which will be poured out on your behalf.\
	
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  But behold, my betrayer's hand is with me on the table. 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  For the Son of Man is going away, as he is destined; and yet woe for the person through whom he is given over!\'94 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  Therefore they began to talk among themselves about who among them was [the one] that was going to do this thing.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 	24
\f1\b0  Mal enge yando costie imbi te pa man mici te *\uc0\u351 \'e9ne n\'e1ve i ant\'fara. 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Ono quentes t\'e9na: \'93I n\'f3rion arani nar herultar, ar i samir t\'fare or te nar estaine *maicarindor. 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Mal elde \'e1va na sie. Mauya yen n\'e1 i ant\'fara mici le n\'e1ve ve i amnessa, ar yen cane, n\'e1ve ve n\'faro. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  An man i ambe t\'fara n\'e1, ye caita ara i sarno hya i n\'faro? Ma uas ye caita ara i sarno? Ono mici le nanye ve i n\'faro.\
	
\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Mal elde nar i el\'e9mier asinye tyastienyassen, 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  ar carin v\'e9re aselde, ve Atarinya ac\'e1rie asinye v\'e9re, pa aranie, 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  matieldan ar sucieldan ara sarnonya aranienyasse, ar harieldan mahalmassen namien i nossi yunque Isra\'e9lo.\'94\
	
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  S\'edmon, S\'edmon, y\'e9! S\'e1tan ac\'e1nie silta le ve ore! 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Mal inye ahy\'e1mie pa elye, i savielya ua nauva loica, ar \'edre mi l\'fa enut\'faliel, \'e1 tala antoryame h\'e1nolyain.\'94\
\
	
\f2\i\b 24
\f3\b0  But [there] was also a quarrel between them about who among them seemed to be the greatest. 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  But he said to them: \'93The kings of the nations are their lords, and [those] that have power over them are called benefactors. 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  But you do not be so. It is necessary for [the one] who is the greatest among you to be like the youngest, and for [him] who rules, to be like a servant. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  For who is the greatest, [the one] who lies at the table or the servant? Is it not [the one] who lies at the table? But among you I am like the servant. \
	
\f2\b 28
\f3\b0  But you are [the ones] that have remained with me in my trials, 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  and I make a covenant with you, like my Father has made with me a covenant, about a kingdom, 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  for you to eat and for you to drink at my table in my kingdom, and for you to sit on thones to judge the twelve tribes of Israel.\
	
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  Simon, Simon, behold! Satan has demanded to sift you like grain! 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  But I have prayed concerning you, that your faith will not be insufficient, and when at [some] time you have returned, bring strength [
\f2\b antoryame,
\f3\b0  strengthening] to your brothers.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes senna: \'93Heru, nanye manwa menien aselye mir mando ar qualme v\'e9la!\'94 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Mal eques: \'93Quetin lyenna, P\'e9ter: Tocot ua lamyuva s\'edra n\'f3 equ\'e9tiel nel i ual ista ni.\'94\
	
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93\'cdre le-mentanen \'fa *pocolleo ar matsocolco ar hyapato, lau pennelte erya nat?\'94 Quentelte: \'93L\'e1nelme.\'94 
\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mal s\'ed mauya yen same *pocolle tala sa, mi imya l\'e9 yando matsocolca, ar mauya yen pene macil vace collarya ar \'f1ete macil i telpen. 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  An quetin len i mauya i nat sina t\'e9cina pa ni nauva carna nanwa: 'Ar anes n\'f3tina mici \uc0\u351 anyel\'f3rali.' An ya ape ni nauva telyaina.\'94 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentelte: \'93Heru, ela, sisse eat macil atta.\'94 Quentes t\'e9na: \'93T\'fa faryat.\'94\
	
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Apa etelendes mennes, ve haimerya n\'e9, i Orontenna *Milpieron, ar hildoryar se-hilyaner.\
\

\f2\i\b 33
\f3\b0  Then he said to him: \'93Lord, I am ready to go with you into prison and death alike!\'94 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  But he said: \'93I say to you, Peter: A cock will not sound today before you have said thrice that you do not know me.\'94\
	
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93When I sent you [forth] without purse and food-box and shoes, surely you did not lack a single thing?\'94 They said: \'93We did not.\'94 
\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93But now it is necessary for [the one] who has a purse to bring it, in the same manner a food-box, and it is necesssary for [the one] how lacks a sword to sell his cloak and get a sword for the money. 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  For I say to you that it is necessary that this thing written about me will be made true: 'And he was counted among lawless ones.' For [that] which concerns me will be completed.\'94 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  Then they said: \'93Lord, see, here are two swords.\'94 He said to them: \'93They [dual] are enough.\'94\
	
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  After he went out he went, as his habit was, to the Mountain of Olives, and his disciples followed him.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  T\'falienwa i n\'f3menna quentes t\'e9na: \'93Hyama, pustien inde tuliello \'fa\uc0\u351 ahtienna!\'94 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Ar s\'e9 lende oa telo, *os hatie sarneva, ar lantanes occaryanta ar hyamne, 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93Atar, qui meril, \'e1 mapa yulma sina nillo! Ananta, nai ind\'f3melya martuva, l\'e1 ninya.\'94 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  T\'e1 vala menello tannexe sen ar talle sen antoryame. 
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  Mal t\'falala mir anquale hyamnes en ambe urdave, ar cendeleya n\'e1ne linque yanen n\'e1ne ve limbar serceva, lantala i talamenna. 
\f0\b 45
\f1\b0  Ar orontes hyamiello, lende i hildonnar ar hirne te lorne ny\'e9renen, 
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mana castalda n\'e1ven lorne? \'c1 orta ar hyama, pustien inde tuliello \'fa\uc0\u351 ahtienna!\'94\
	
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  \'cdre ena carampes, y\'e9! \uc0\u351 anga, ar i n\'e9r estaina Y\'faras, qu\'e9n i yunqueo, lende opo te. T\'fales Y\'e9sunna miquien se.\
\

\f2\i\b 40
\f3\b0  Having come to the place he said to them: \'93Pray, to stop yourselves from coming into temptation!\'94 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  And he went away from them, about a stone's throw, and he fell to his knees [dual] and prayed, 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  saying: \'93Father, if you wish, take this cup from me! And yet, may your will happen, not mine.\'94 
\f2\b 43
\f3\b0  Then an angel from heaven showed himself to him and brought him strength. 
\f2\b 44
\f3\b0  But coming into an agony he prayed still more arduously, and his face was wet with what was like drops of blood, falling to the ground. 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  And he arose from prayer, went to the discuples and found them asleep with grief, 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  and he said to them: \'93What is your reason for being asleep? Rise and pray, to stop yourselves from coming into temptation!\'94\
	
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  While still he spoke, behold! a crowd, and the man called Judas, one of the twelve, went in front of  them. He came to Jesus to kiss him.\

\f1\i0  \

\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Y\'faras, ma *vartal i Atanyondo miquenen?\'94 
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  \'cdre i queni \'f3se cenner ya martumne, quentelte: \'93Heru, ma petuvalme i macilden?\'94 
\f0\b 50
\f1\b0  Ar qu\'e9n mici te pente i h\'e9ra *airimo m\'f3l ar aucirne forya hlarya. 
\f0\b 51
\f1\b0  Mal hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Lava yando si marta!\'94 Ar appanes i hlas ar nestane se. 
\f0\b 52
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus t\'e1 quente i h\'e9re *airimonnar ar i cordahestannar ar amy\'e1rannar i n\'e1ner t\'falienwe tar mapien se: \'93Ma etut\'falielde arwa macillion ar rundalion, ve arponna? 
\f0\b 53
\f1\b0  Aure apa aure engen aselde i cordasse, ar ualde panyane m\'e1ldat nisse. Mal si n\'e1 *lenya l\'fame, ar mornie ture.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 48
\f3\b0  But Jesus said to him: \'93Judas, do you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?\'94 
\f2\b 49
\f3\b0  When the people with him saw what was going to happen, they said: \'93Lord, are we to strike with the sword?\'94 [
\f2\b macil-nen
\f3\b0  > 
\f2\b macilden
\f3\b0 ] 
\f2\b 50
\f3\b0  And one among them struck the chief priest's slave and cut off his right ear. 
\f2\b 51
\f3\b0  But in answer Jesus said: \'93Let this as well happen.\'94 And he touched the ear and healed him. 
\f2\b 52
\f3\b0  Jesus then said to the chief priests and to the temple captains and to the elders that were come there to seize him: \'93Have you come having swords and clubs, as upon a robber? 
\f2\b 53
\f3\b0  Day after day I was with you in the temple, and you did not put your hands on me. But this is your hour, and darkness rules.\'94\

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 54
\f1\b0  T\'e1 nampeltes ar tulyane se oa ar talle se mir i h\'e9ra *airimo coa, mal P\'e9ter hilyane haiya. 
\f0\b 55 
\f1\b0 \'cdre nartanelte n\'e1re endesse i paco ar hamner undu uo, P\'e9ter hamne mici te. 
\f0\b 56
\f1\b0  Mal enge *n\'fare ye cenne se ara i ruine, ar apa tirie P\'e9ter quentes: \'93Yando n\'e9r sina n\'e1ne aselte.\'94 
\f0\b 57
\f1\b0  Mal laquentes sa, qu\'e9tala: \'93Uan ista se, n\'eds!\'94 
\f0\b 58
\f1\b0  Apa \uc0\u351 inta l\'fame hyana qu\'e9n, c\'e9nala se, quente: \'93Yando elye er mici t\'e9!\'94 Mal P\'e9ter quente: \'93N\'e9r, uan!\'94 
\f0\b 59
\f1\b0  Ar apa *os l\'fame n\'e1ne vanwa, hyana n\'e9r quente tancave: \'93\'c9 yando n\'e9r sina n\'e1ne \'f3se! N\'e1se yando Alileallo!\'94 
\f0\b 60
\f1\b0  Mal P\'e9ter quente: \'93N\'e9r, uan ista ya qu\'e9tal!\'94 Ar mi yana l\'fa, \'edre en quequentes, tocot lamyane. 
\f0\b 61
\f1\b0  Ar i Heru querne inse ar yente P\'e9terenna, ar P\'e9ter enyalle i Heruo quetie \'edre quentes senna: \'93N\'f3 tocot lamya s\'edra, ni-laquetuval nel.\'94 
\f0\b 62
\f1\b0  Ar lendes ettenna ar talante n\'edressen.\
	
\f0\b 63
\f1\b0  S\'ed i neri i s\'e1mer se mandosse lenganer senna yaiwenen, p\'e9tala se. 
\f0\b 64
\f1\b0  Ar apa tompeltes maquentelte: \'93Queta ve *Eruterc\'e1no! Man n\'e1ne ye pente lye?\'94 
\f0\b 65
\f1\b0  Ar rimbe hyane naiqueti\'e9li quentelte senna.\
\

\f2\i\b 	54
\f3\b0  Then they seized him andd led him away and brought him into the chief priests's house, but Peter followed nearby. 
\f2\b 55 
\f3\b0 When they lit a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter sat among them. 
\f2\b 56
\f3\b0  But [there] was a maidservant who saw him by the fire, and after watching Peter she said: \'93Also this man was with them.\'94 
\f2\b 57
\f3\b0  But he denied it, saying: \'93I do not know him, woman!\'94 
\f2\b 58
\f3\b0  After a short time another person, seeing him, said: \'93You as well [are] one among them!\'94 But Peter said: \'93Man, I am not!\'94 
\f2\b 59
\f3\b0  And after about an hour was past, another man said firmly: \'93Indeed this man was with him! He is also from Galilee!\'94 
\f2\b 60
\f3\b0  But Peter said: \'93Man, I do not know what you are saying!\'94 And in that moment, while he was still speaking, a cock sounded. 
\f2\b 61
\f3\b0  And the Lord turned [Q: turned himself] and looked at Peter, and Peter recalled the saying of the Kord when he said to him: \'93Before a cock sounds today, you will deny me thrice.\'94 
\f2\b 62
\f3\b0  And he went outside and broke down in tears.\
	
\f2\b 63 
\f3\b0 Now the men that had him in custody behaved towards with with scorn, striking him. 
\f2\b 64
\f3\b0  And after they covered him they asked: \'93Speak like a prophet! Who was [the one] that struck you?\'94  And numerous other blasphemies they spoke to him. \

\f1\i0 \
	
\f0\b 66
\f1\b0  \'cdre i aure t\'fale, i ocombe amy\'e1raron i lieo, i h\'e9re *airimor ar i parmangolmor v\'e9la, ocomner. Ar tunceltes epe ocombelta, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 67
\f1\b0  \'93Qui elye n\'e1 i Hristo, \'e1men nyare!\'94 Mal quentes t\'e9na: \'93Yando qui nyarnen len, laume savumneldes. 
\f0\b 68
\f1\b0  Ente, qui maquenten lenna, laume antumnelde nin hanquenta. 
\f0\b 69
\f1\b0  Mal ho s\'ed i Atanyondo haruva ara Eruo forma t\'fareva.\'94 
\f0\b 70
\f1\b0  T\'e1 illi mici te quenter: \'93Ma elye, t\'e1, n\'e1 Eruo yondo?\'94 
\f0\b 71
\f1\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Elde quetir i nanye.\'94 
\f0\b 71
\f1\b0  Quentelte: \'93Mana amba maure samilve astaroiva? An elve inwe ahl\'e1rier sa v\'e9ra antoryallo!\'94\
\
	
\f2\i\b 66
\f3\b0  When the day came, the council [or, congregation] of elders of the people, the chief priests and the scribes alike, assembled. And they drew him before their council, saying: 
\f2\b 67
\f3\b0  \'93If you are the Christ, tell us!\'94 But he said to them: \'93Also [/even] if I told you, you were by no means going to believe it. 
\f2\b 68
\f3\b0  Furthermore, if I told you, you were by no means going to give me an answer. 
\f2\b 69
\f3\b0  But from now the Son of Man shall sit beside God's right hand of power.\'94 
\f2\b 70
\f3\b0  Then all among them said: \'93Are you, then, God's son?\'94 
\f2\b 71
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93\ul You\ulnone  say that I am.\'94 
\f2\b 71
\f3\b0  They said: \'93What more need do we have of witnesses? For we ourselves have heard it from his own mouth!\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 23\

\f1\b0 Ar apa quanda rimbelta oronte, tulyaneltes Pil\'e1tonna. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  *Yestanelte quete pa intyaine ongweryar, qu\'e9tala: \'93N\'e9r sina ih\'edrielme nuqu\'e9ra n\'f3relma ar v\'e1qu\'e9ta i aiquen paitya *tungwi i Ingaranen, ar quetis pa inse i n\'e1se Hristo, aran.\'94\

\f0\b \

\f2\i CHAPTER 23\

\f3\b0 And after their entire multitude arose, they led him to Pilate. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  They began to speak about his supposed crimes, saying: \'93This man we have found subverting [lit. under-turning] our nation and forbidding that anyone pay taxes to the High King, and he says about himself that he is Christ, a king.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 3
\f1\b0  Mal Pil\'e1to maquente senna: \'93Ma elye aran Y\'fararon n\'e1?\'94 Hanquentasse eques: \'93Elye quete sa.\'94 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  Mal Pil\'e1to quente i h\'e9re *airimonnar ar i \uc0\u351 angannar: \'93Uan hire ongwe atan sinasse.\'94 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  Mal t\'e9 ninder se, qu\'e9tala: \'93Valtas i lie, peantala ter i quanda Y\'farea, ar apa *yestie Aileasse ut\'falies yando sir!\'94\
	
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Ono Pil\'e1to, \'edre hlasses ta, maquente qui i atan n\'e1ne Alileallo. 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  Ar apa sintes i \'e9 anes  Herolo araniello, se-mentanes Herolenna, pan yando s\'e9 n\'e1ne Yer\'fasalemesse yane auressen. 
\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Mal Herol, \'edre cennes Y\'e9sus, s\'e1me t\'fara alasse, an n\'f3vo andave mernes velitas, apa hlarie pa se, ar s\'e1mes i estel i cenumnes tanwa martea s\'e9nen. 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  Maquentes senna rimbe maquetier, ono s\'e9 hanquente sen munta.   \
\

\f2\i\b 3
\f3\b0  But Pilate asked him: \'93Are you king of [the] Jews?\'94 In answer he said: \'93You say it.\'94 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  But Pilate said to the chief priests and to the crowds: \'93I do not find [any] crime on [the part of] this man.\'94 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  But they pressed him, saying: \'93He stirs up the people, teaching through the entire Judea, and after beginning in Galilee he has come also [/even] here!\'94 [
\f2\b sir
\f3\b0  = hither] \
	
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  But Pilate, when he heard that, asked if the man was from Galilee. 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  And after he knew [for sure] that he was indeed from Herod's kingdom, he sent him to Herod, since also he was in Jerusalem in those days. 
\f2\b 8
\f3\b0  But Herod, when he saw Jesus, had great joy, for beforehand he long wished to meet him, after hearing about him, and he had the hope that he was going to see a sign happen by him. 
\f2\b 9
\f3\b0  He asked him many questions, but he answered him nothing.\

\f1\i0  \

\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Mal i h\'e9re *airimor ar i parmangolmor oronter ar caramper pa ongweli yar quentelte carnes. 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  T\'e1 Herol as cundoryar sanner  i anes munta, ar yaiwesse tompeltes calima larmanen ar *nanwentaner se Pil\'e1tonna. 
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Yana auresse Herol ar Pil\'e1to *yestaner nilme, qu\'e9n as i exe, an n\'f3 si anette cottoli. \
	
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Pil\'e1to t\'e1 comyane i h\'e9re *airimor ar i lie 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  ar quente t\'e9na: \'93Tallelde n\'e9r sina ninna ve qu\'e9n ye valta i lie, ar y\'e9! cendanenyes epe le, mal uan hirne sesse c\'e1ma pa i ongwi yar qu\'e9telde ac\'e1ries. 
\f0\b 15
\f1\b0  \'c9 yando Herol l\'e1ne, an se-*nanwentanes venna, ar y\'e9! munta valda qualmeo anaie carna lo se. 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  Etta paimestuvanyes; t\'e1 lehtuvanyes.\'94 [
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0 ] 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Mal quanda liy\'famelta y\'e1me: \'93\'c1 mapa oa n\'e9r sina, mal \'e1men lehta Varavas!\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  S\'e9 n\'e1ne n\'e9r h\'e1tina mir mando castanen amorti\'e9no ya n\'e1ne martienwa i ostosse, ar nahti\'e9no.\
\

\f2\i\b 10
\f3\b0  But the chief priests and the scribes arose and talked about crimes that they said he did. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  Then Herod and his guards thought that he was nothing, and in mockery they covered him with a bright garment and sent him back to Pilate. 
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  On that day Herod and Pilate started a friendship, one with the other, for before this they were enemies.\
	
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  Pilate then assembled the chief priests and the people 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  and said to them: \'93You brought this man to me as one who stirs up the people, and behold! I examined him before you, but I did not find in him [any] guilt concerning the things that you say he has done. 
\f2\b 15
\f3\b0  Indeed also Herod did not [= Indeed neither did Herod], for he sent him back to us, and behold! nothing worthy of death has been done by him. 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  Therefore I will chastise him; then I will release him. [
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0 ] 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  But their entire host cried: \'93Take away this man, but release to us Barabbas!\'94 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  He was a man thrown into prison by reason of an uprising that had happened in the city, and of murder. \

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  Ata Pil\'e1to yalle te, pan mernes lehta Y\'e9sus. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  T\'e1 y\'e1melte, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1se tarwesta, \'e1se tarwesta!\'94 
\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  M\'ed neldea l\'fa quentes t\'e9na: \'93T\'e1 mana ulco n\'e9r sina ac\'e1rie? Munta valda qualmen hirnen sesse. Apa antie sen paimesta etta lehtuvanyes.\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  Mal nindeltes hoe rambel\'ednen, c\'e1nala tarwestierya, ar rambeltar *orturner. 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Ar Pil\'e1to namne i \'f1etumnelte ya mernelte. 
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  Lehtanes tien i n\'e9r h\'e1tina mir mando amorti\'e9nen ar nahti\'e9nen, ye arcanelte, mal Y\'e9sus antanes olla nirmeltan.\
	
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre mentaneltes oa, nampelte qu\'e9n estaina S\'edmon Cir\'e9nello ye t\'fale i restallon, ar mauyanelte sen cole tarwerya. 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Mal hilyane se hoa liy\'fame i liello, ar nisseli i pentexer ny\'e9renen ar n\'e1ner yaimie sen. \
\

\f2\i\b 20
\f3\b0  Again Pilate called them, since he wanted to release Jesus. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  Then they cried, saying: \'93Crucify him, crucify him!\'94 
\f2\b 22
\f3\b0  For the third time he said to them: \'93Than what evil has this man done? Nothing worthy of death I found in him. After giving him chastisement I will therefore release him.\'94 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  But they pressed him with loud [lit. great] shouts, demanding his crucifixion, and their shouts prevailed. 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  And Pilate judged that they were going to get what they wanted. 
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  He released to them the man thrown into prison because of [
\f2\b -nen
\f3\b0 ] an uprising and because of murder, whom they asked for, but Jesus he gave over to their will.\
	
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  And when they led him away, they seized a person called Simon from Cyrene who came from the fields, and they compelled him to carry his cross. 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  But [there] followed him a great multitude from the people, and some women that struck themselves with [-
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] grief and were wailing for him.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 28
\f1\b0  Y\'e9sus querne inse t\'e9na ar quente: \'93Yer\'fasal\'e9mo yeldi, \'e1va na yaimie nin! Na yaimie elden ar h\'ednaldain, an y\'e9! auri t\'falar yassen queni quetuvar: 'Valime nar i nissi \'fa y\'e1veo, ar i s\'famar yar uar nostane ar i tyetsi yar uar *tyente!' 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  T\'e1 *yestuvalte quete i orontinnar: '\'c1 lanta menna!', ar i ambonnar: '\'c1me tope!' 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  An qui carilte nati sine \'edre i alda n\'e1 n\'edte, mana martuva \'edre ehesties?\'94\
	
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Mal hyana n\'e9r atta, ulcarindor, n\'e1net yando tulyaine tar n\'e1ven nance \'f3se. 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre t\'falelte i n\'f3menna estaina *Caraxo, tarwestanelte s\'e9 ar i ulcarindor, er foryaryasse ar er hyaryaryasse. 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Atar, \'e1ten apsene, an ualte ista mana c\'e1ralte.\'94 Ente, satien larmaryar hantelte *\uc0\u351 anwali. 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Ar i queni tirner. Mal i turi caramper yaiwenen, qu\'e9tala: \'93Hyanali erehties; lava sen rehta inse, qui n\'e9r sina n\'e1 Eruo Hristo, i c\'edlina.\'94 \
\

\f2\i\b 28
\f3\b0  Jesus turned [Q: turned himself] towards them and said: 
\f1\i0 \'93
\f3\i Daughters of Jerusalem, do not be wailing for me! Be wailing for yourselves and for your children, for behold! days are coming in which people will say: 'Happy are the women without fruit, and the wombs that did not conceive and he nipples that did not suckle!' 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  Then they will begin to say to the mountains: 'Fall upon us!', and to the hills: 'Cover us!' 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  For if they do thest things when the tree is moist, what will happen when it has withered?\'94\
	
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  But two other men, evildoers, were also led thither to be slain with him. 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  And when they came to the place called Skull, they crucified him and the evildoers, one on his right and one on his left, 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  But Jesus said: 
\f1\i0 \'93
\f3\i Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.\'94 Furthermore, to distribute his garments they threw lots. 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  And the people watched. But the rulers talked with mockery, saying: 
\f1\i0 \'93
\f3\i Others he has saved; let him save himself, if this man is God's Christ, the chosen one.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  Yando i ohtari lenganer senna yaiwenen. T\'falelte hare ar antaner se s\'e1ra limpenen 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  ar quenter: \'93Qui nalye Y\'fararon aran, \'e1 rehta imle!\'94 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Yando enge tecie or se: \'93Si n\'e1 aran Y\'fararon.\'94\
	
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Mal er i lingala \'facarindoron naiquente senna: \'93Ma elye ua i Hristo? \'c1 rehta imle ar met!\'94 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse i exe naityane se ar quente: \'93Ma ual ruce Erullo, s\'ed \'edre nalye i imya n\'e1miesse? 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Ar engwe failave sie, an c\'e1mangwe yan nangwe valde i natinen yar carnengwe, mal n\'e9r sina ac\'e1rie munta ulca.\'94 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Ar quentes senna: \'93Y\'e9sus, \'e1ni enyale \'edre tulil aranielyasse!\'94 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  Ar quentes senna: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lyenna: S\'edra euval asinye mi Paralis.\'94\

\f3\i \

\f2\b 36
\f3\b0  Also the soldiers behaved towards him with scorn. They came near and presented him with sour wine 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  and said: \'93If you are king of [the] Jews, save yourself!\'94 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  Also [there] was a writing above him: \'93This is the king of [the] Jews.\'94\
	
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  But one of the hanging evildoers blasphemed him: \'94Are you not the Christ? Save yourself and us!\'94 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  In answer the other rebuked him and said: \'94Do you not fear God, now that you are under the same judgement? 41 And we [dual] justly so, for we are receiving that to which we are worthy by the things that we have done, but this man has done nothing evil.\'94 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  And he said to him: \'93Jesus, recall me when you come in your kingdom!\'94
\f2\b  43
\f3\b0  And he said to him: \'93Truly I say to you: Today you will be with be in Paradise.\'94\
\

\f1\i0 	
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  S\'ed i l\'fame n\'e1ne *os i enquea, ar mornie lantane i quanda cemenna tenna i nertea l\'fame, 
\f0\b 45 
\f1\b0 pan i \'e1re loitane; t\'e1 i fanwa i cordasse n\'e1ne narcaina undu i ende. 
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e1mala taura \'f3manen, Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Atar, mir m\'e1tyat antan olla fairenya!\'94 Apa quetie ta effirnes.\
	
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  \'cdre i *tuxantur cenne ya martane, antanes alcar Erun ar quente: \'93Nanwave n\'e9r sina n\'e1ne faila!\'94 
\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  Ar ilye i \uc0\u351 angar yar n\'e1ner oc\'f3mienye cenie sinan, \'edre cennelte yar martaner, lender oa p\'e9tala ambostelta, 
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  Mal i sinter Y\'e9sus tarner haiya, yando i nissi i t\'faler \'f3se Alileallo, \'edre cennelte nati sine. 
\f0\b 50 
\f1\b0 Ar t\'fale n\'e9r yeo esse n\'e1ne Y\'f3sef, qu\'e9n i Combeo, mane ar faila n\'e9r. 
\f0\b 51
\f1\b0  S\'e9 ua quente n\'e1 panoltanna hya cardaltanna. T\'fales Arima\uc0\u351 eallo, osto i Y\'fararon, ye yente ompa Eruo aranienna. 
\f0\b 52
\f1\b0  Apa menie minna Pil\'e1tonna arcanes Y\'e9suo hroa. \
\
	
\f2\i\b 44
\f3\b0  Now the hour was around the eighth, and darkness fell upon the entire earth until the ninth hour, 
\f2\b 45
\f3\b0  since the sunlight failed. Then the curtain in the temple was torn down the middle. 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  And crying with a mighty voice, Jesus said: \'93Father, into your hands I give over my spirit!\'94 After saying that he expired.\
	
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  When the centurion saw what happened, he gave glory to God and said: \'93Truly this man was just!\'94 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  And all the crowds that were gathered for this sight, when they saw [the things] that happened, went away beating their chest. 
\f2\b 49
\f3\b0  But [those] that knew Jesus stood far away, also the women that came with him from Galilee, watching these things. 
\f2\b 50
\f3\b0  And [there] came a man whose name was Joseph, a person of the Council, a good and just man. 
\f2\b 51
\f3\b0  He did not say yes to their plan or their deed. He came from Arimathea, a city of the Jews, and looked forward to God's kingdom. 
\f2\b 52
\f3\b0  After going inside to Pilate he asked for Jesus' body.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 53 
\f1\b0 Ar nampeses undu ar vaitane sa *p\'e1\uc0\u351 enen, ar se-panyanes hr\'f3tanoirisse i ondosse, yasse *\'faquen n\'e1ne caitienwa n\'f3vo. 
\f0\b 54
\f1\b0  Si n\'e1ne i aure Manwi\'e9va, ar i *sendareo yesta n\'e1ne hare. 
\f0\b 55
\f1\b0  Mal i nissi i t\'faler \'f3se et Alileallo hilyaner ar cenner i noire ar i n\'f3me yasse hroarya n\'e1ne panyaina. 
\f0\b 56
\f1\b0  T\'e1 nanwennelte manwien *ty\'e1velasseli ar n\'ed\uc0\u351 ime milloli. Mal sendelte i *sendaresse, i axannen. \

\f3\i \

\f2\b 53
\f3\b0  And he took it down and wrapped it with linen, and he put him in a carved-out tomb in the rock, in which no one had lain before. 
\f2\b 54
\f3\b0  This was the day of Preparation, and the beginning of the sabbath was near. 
\f2\b 55
\f3\b0  But the women that came with him from Galilee followed and saw the tomb and the place where his body was placed. 
\f2\b 56
\f3\b0  Then they went back to prepare spices and fragrant oils. But they rested on the sabbath, according to [or 'by', -
\f2\b nen
\f3\b0 ] the commandment.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 24 \

\f1\b0 I minya auresse i otsolasse lendelte ita arinyave i noirinna, c\'f3lala i *ty\'e1velassi manwaine lo te. 
\f0\b 2
\f1\b0  Mal hirnelte i ondo *peltaina oa i noirillo, ar \'edre lendelte minna, ualte hire i Heru Y\'e9sus Hristo hroa. 
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0  \'cdre anelte elmendasse pa si, y\'e9! n\'e9r atta arwe alcarinque larmar tarnet ara te. 
\f0\b 5
\f1\b0  \'cdre i nissi n\'e1ner ruhtaine ar querner cendelelta i talamenna, i neri quenter t\'e9na: \'93Manen n\'e1 i cestealde i Coirea mici qualini? 
\f0\b 6
\f1\b0  Uas sisse, mal anaies ortaina! Enyala manen carampes lenna \'edre en anes Alileasse, 
\f0\b 7
\f1\b0  qu\'e9tala i mauya i Atanyondon n\'e1ve antaina olla mannar atanion \'facareva ar n\'e1ve tarwestaina ar orta i neldea auresse.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b CHAPTER 24\

\f3\b0 On the first day of [lit. in] the week they went very early to the tomb, bearing the spices prepared by them. 
\f2\b 2
\f3\b0  But they found the stone rolled away from the grave, and when they went inside, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
\f2\b 4
\f3\b0  While they were in wonder about this, behold! two men with radiant garments stood beside them. 
\f2\b 5
\f3\b0  When the women were terrified and turned their face towards the ground, the men said to them: \'93How is [it] that you are seeking the Living One among [the] dead? 
\f2\b 6
\f3\b0  He is not here, but he has been raised! Recall how he spoke to you when he was still in Galilee, 
\f2\b 7
\f3\b0  saying that it is necessary for the Son of Man to be given over into the hands of men of sin and to be cruficied and to rise on the third day.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 8
\f1\b0  Ar enyallelte quetieryar, 
\f0\b 9
\f1\b0  ar nanwennelte i noirillo ar nyarner ilye nati sine i minquen ar ilye i exin. 
\f0\b 10
\f1\b0  Anelte Mar\'eda Mahtal\'e9ne, ar Yoanna, ar Mar\'eda amil Y\'e1covo. Yando i hyane nissi aselte nyarner i apostelin nati sine. 
\f0\b 11
\f1\b0  Mal quetier sine \uc0\u351 \'e9ner tien ve *aucie, ar ualte s\'e1ve ya i nissi quenter.\
	
\f0\b 12
\f1\b0  Mal P\'e9ter oronte ar norne i noirinna, ar c\'fanala ompa cennes i vaimar erinque. T\'e1 lendes oa, elmendasse pa mana n\'e1ne martienwa.\
	
\f0\b 13
\f1\b0  Mal y\'e9! i imya auresse atta mici te n\'e1net tiettasse mastonna estaina Emmaus, l\'e1r atta ar canasta Yer\'fasalemello, 
\f0\b 14
\f1\b0  ar quequentette qu\'e9n as i exe pa ilye nati sine yar n\'e1ner martienwe.\
\

\f2\i\b 8
\f3\b0  And they recalled his sayings, 
\f2\b 9 
\f3\b0 and they returned from the tomb and told all these things to the eleven and to all the others. 
\f2\b 10
\f3\b0  They were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary mother of Jacob. Also the other women with them told the apostles these things. 
\f2\b 11
\f3\b0  But these sayings seemed to them like folly, and they did not believe what the women said.\
	
\f2\b 12
\f3\b0  But Peter arose and went to the tomb, and bending forward he saw the wrappings alone. Then he went away, in wonder about what had happened.\
	
\f2\b 13
\f3\b0  But behold! on the same day two among them were on their way to a city called Emmaus, two and a quarter leagues [= 11 kilometers] from Jerusalem, 
\f2\b 14
\f3\b0  and they [dual] were talking one with the other about all these things that had happened.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 	15
\f1\b0  S\'ed \'edre quequentette ar quaptanette quettali, yando Y\'e9sus immo t\'fale hare ar vantane asette, 
\f0\b 16
\f1\b0  mal henduttat n\'e1net h\'e9pine istiello se. 
\f0\b 17
\f1\b0  Quentes t\'fana: \'93Mana quettar sine yar quapteaste \'edre vanteaste?\'94 Ar tarnette arwe ny\'e9re mi cendeletta. 
\f0\b 18
\f1\b0  Hanquentasse i qu\'e9n estaina Cleopas quente senna: \'93Ma nalye i erya qu\'e9n m\'e1rala Yer\'fasalemesse ye ua ista i nati yar amartier sasse mi auri sine?\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'fana: \'93Mana?\'94 Quentette senna: \'93I nattor yar ape Y\'e9sus N\'e1saretello, ye n\'e1ne Eruterc\'e1no taura mi carda ar quetta epe Eru ar i quanda lie 
\f0\b 20
\f1\b0  \'96 ar manen h\'e9re *airimonyar antaner se olla n\'e1mien qualmeva ar tarwestaner se. 
\f0\b 21
\f1\b0  Mal s\'e1melme i estel i n\'e9r sina n\'e1ne ye etelehtumne Israel. Ono ara ilye nati sine, s\'edra n\'e1 i neldea aure apa si martane.\
\
	
\f2\i\b 15
\f3\b0  Now when they were talking and exchanged words, also Jesus himself came near and walked with them, 
\f2\b 16
\f3\b0  but their eyes [dual] were kept from knowing him. 
\f2\b 17
\f3\b0  He said to them: 
\f1\i0 \'94
\f3\i What are these words that you are exchanging while you are walking?\'94 And they stood [still], with grief in their face. 
\f2\b 18
\f3\b0  In answer the man called Cleophas said to him: \'93Are you the only person dwelling in Jerusalem who does not know the things that have happened in it in these days?\'94 
\f2\b 19
\f3\b0  And he said: \'93What?\'94 They said to him: \'93The things that concern Jesus from Nazareth, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and the entire people 
\f2\b 20
\f3\b0  \'96 and how our chief priests gave him over to a judgement of death and crucified him. 
\f2\b 21
\f3\b0  But we had the hope that this man was [the one] that was going to deliver Israel. But besides all these things, now is the third day after this happened.\'94\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 22
\f1\b0  Ente, nisseli mici me acaptier me, an apa menie arinyave i noirinna 
\f0\b 23
\f1\b0  \'fa hiri\'e9no hroarya t\'falelte qu\'e9tala i cennelte maur valal\'edva, i quenter i n\'e1se coirea. 
\f0\b 24
\f1\b0  Yando, quelli mici me lender oa i noirinna, ar hirnelte i enge sie, aqua ve i nissi quenter, mal ualte cene s\'e9.\'94\
	
\f0\b 25
\f1\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'fana: \'93A \'fahandar, lence endeo savien ilye i nati yar i Eruterc\'e1nor quenter! 
\f0\b 26
\f1\b0  Ma ua mauyane i Hriston perpere nati sine ar mene mir alcarerya?\'94 
\f0\b 27
\f1\b0  Ar *yestala ho M\'f3ses, ar ilye i Eruterc\'e1nor, tyarnes tu hanya i nati yar apir inse ilye i Tehtelessen. \
	\

\f2\i\b 22
\f3\b0  Furthermore, some women among us have startled us, for after going early to the tomb 
\f2\b 23
\f3\b0  without finding his body they came saying that they saw a vision of some angels, that said that he is alive. 
\f2\b 24
\f3\b0  Also, some among us went away to the tomb, and they found that [it] was so, just as the women said, but they did not see him.\'94\
	
\f2\b 25
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93O senseless ones, slow of heart to believe all the things that the Prophets said! 
\f2\b 26
\f3\b0  Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and go into his glory?\'94 
\f2\b 27
\f3\b0  And beginning from Moses, and all the Prophets, he caused them to understand the things that concern himself in the Scriptures. \

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 	28
\f1\b0  Ar t\'falette i mastonna ya n\'e1ne lendatto met, ar s\'e9 carne ve qui lelyumnes ompa talo. 
\f0\b 29
\f1\b0  Mal mauyanette sen, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1 lemya asemme, an i \uc0\u351 inye hare n\'e1, ar i aure rato nauva vanwa.\'94 
\f0\b 30
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre caines asette ara i sarno nampes i massa, aistane sa, rance sa ar antane sa tun. 
\f0\b 31
\f1\b0  Ar mi yana l\'fa henduttat n\'e1net aqua pantaine, ar sintettes, mal v\'e1nes tullo. 
\f0\b 32
\f1\b0  Ar quentette, qu\'e9n i exenna: \'94Ma endangwa ua uryane \'edre quequentes asengwe i mallesse, \'edre pantanes i Tehteler vent?\'94 
\f0\b 33
\f1\b0  Ar mi yana imya l\'fame orontette ar nanwennette Yer\'fasalemenna, ar hirnette i yunque ar i n\'e1ner oc\'f3mienwe aselte, 
\f0\b 34
\f1\b0  i quenter: \'93I Heru \'e9 anaie ortaina ar at\'e1nie inse S\'edmonden!\'94 
\f0\b 35
\f1\b0  Ar t\'fa nyarnet pa yar n\'e1ner martienwe i mallesse ar manen anes carna sinwa tun raci\'e9nen i massa.\
\

\f3\i  	
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  And they came to the city that was the [
\f2\b met 
\f3\b0 =] goal of their journey, and he did as if he was going to go forward from there. 
\f2\b 29
\f3\b0  But they compelled him, saying: \'93Remain with us [dual], for the evening is near, and the day will soon be gone.\'94 
\f2\b 30
\f3\b0  And when he lay with them at the table he took the bread, blessed it, broke it and gave it to them. 
\f2\b 31
\f3\b0  And in that moment their eyes were fully opened, and they knew him, but he disappeared from them. 
\f2\b 32
\f3\b0  And they said, one to the other: \'93Did our heart not burn when he was speaking with us on the road, when he opened the Scriptures to us?\'93 
\f2\b 33
\f3\b0  And in that same hour they arose and returned to Jerusalem, and they found the eleven and [those] that were gathered with them, 
\f2\b 34
\f3\b0  who said: \'93The Lord has indeed been raised and has shown himself to Simon!\'94 
\f2\b 35
\f3\b0  And they told about [the things] that had happened on the road and how he was made known to them by breaking the bread.\

\f1\i0  \

\f0\b 36
\f1\b0  \'cdre en quentelte pa nati sine, Y\'e9sus immo tarne endeltasse ar quente t\'e9na: \'93Nai samuvalde raine!\'94 
\f0\b 37
\f1\b0  Mal pan anelte ruhtaine ar s\'e1mer caure, sannelte i cennelte faire. 
\f0\b 38
\f1\b0  Etta quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mana castalda rucieldan, ar manen n\'e1 i ortear sanweli \'fasavi\'e9va endaldasse? 
\f0\b 39
\f1\b0  Cena m\'e1nyat ar talunyat, i inye n\'e1; \'e1ni appa ar cena, an faire ua same hr\'e1ve yo axor ve c\'e9nalde i inye same.\'94 
\f0\b 40
\f1\b0  Ar qu\'e9tala si tannes tien m\'e1ryat ar talyat. 
\f0\b 41
\f1\b0  Mal \'edre en ualte s\'e1ve, i alassenen ar i elmendanen, quentes t\'e9na: \'93Ma s\'e1malde sisse nat matien?\'94 
\f0\b 42
\f1\b0  Ar antanelte sen ranta *aptaina lingwiva, 
\f0\b 43
\f1\b0  ar nampeses ar mante sa epe hendultat.\
	
\f0\b 44
\f1\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'94Nati sine nar quettanyar yar quenten lenna \'edre en anen aselde, i ilye i nati t\'e9cine M\'f3seo \uc0\u350 anyesse ar m\'ed Eruterc\'e1nor ar mi Airel\'edri nauvar carne nanwe.\'94\
\

\f2\i\b 36
\f3\b0  When they still spoke about these things, Jesus himself stood in their midst and said to them: \'93May you have peace!\'94 
\f2\b 37
\f3\b0  But since they were terrified and had fear, they thought that they saw a spirit. 
\f2\b 38
\f3\b0  Therefore he said to them: \'93What is your reason for your fear, and how is [it] that thoughts of unbelief are arising in your heart? 
\f2\b 39
\f3\b0  See my hands and my feet, that it is I; touch me and see, for a spirit does not have flesh and bones as you are seeing that I have.\'94 
\f2\b 40
\f3\b0  And saying this he showed them his hands and his feet. 
\f2\b 41
\f3\b0  But when they still did not believe, for the joy and for the wonder, he said to them: \'93Are you having here [some]thing to eat?\'94 
\f2\b 42
\f3\b0  And they gave him a piece of broiled fish, 
\f2\b 43
\f3\b0  and he took it and ate it before their eyes.\

\f1\i0 \

\f0\b 45 
\f1\b0 T\'e1 pantanes s\'e1malta, l\'e1vala tien hanya i Tehteler, 
\f0\b 46
\f1\b0  ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Sie n\'e1 t\'e9cina, i perperumne i Hristo, ar i ortumnes i neldea auresse, 
\f0\b 47
\f1\b0  ar i esseryanen mo *nyardumne inwis \'facariva ilye i n\'f3ressen. *Yestala Yer\'fasalemello 
\f0\b 48
\f1\b0  elde nauvar *vettoli pa nati sine. 
\f0\b 49
\f1\b0  Ar y\'e9! inye menta lenna ta pa ya Atarinya antane vanda. Mal elde hara i ostosse tenna nauvalde t\'f3pine t\'farenen et tarmenello.\'94\
	
\f0\b 50
\f1\b0  Epeta tulyanes te tenna Vet\'e1nia, ar ortanes m\'e1ryat ar aistane te. 
\f0\b 51
\f1\b0  Ar \'edre aistanes te, anes mapaina oa tello ar c\'f3lina ama mir menel. 
\f0\b 52
\f1\b0  Ar lantanelte undu sen ar nanwenner Y\'e9rusalemenna arwe t\'fara alasseo. 
\f0\b 53
\f1\b0  Ar anelte illume i cordasse, aistala Eru.\
	\
	
\f2\i\b 45
\f3\b0  Then he opened their mind, allowing them to understand the scriptures, 
\f2\b 46
\f3\b0  and he said to them: \'93So [it] is written, that the Christ was going to suffer, and that he was going to rise on the third day, 
\f2\b 47
\f3\b0  and that by his name one was going to preach repentance of sins in all the nations. Beginning from Jerusalem 
\f2\b 48
\f3\b0  you will be witnesses of these things. 
\f2\b 49
\f3\b0  And behold! I send you that of which my father gave promise. But you stay in the city until you shall be covered with power from on high.\'94\
	
\f2\b 50
\f3\b0  Thereafter he led them as far as Bethany, and he raised his hands and blessed them. 
\f2\b 51
\f3\b0  And while he blessed them, he was taken away from them and carried up into heaven. 
\f2\b 52
\f3\b0  And they fell down to him and returned to Jerusalem having great joy. 
\f2\b 53
\f3\b0  And they were always in the temple, blessing God.\
}