{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2513
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldItalicMT;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
{\info
{\title Anna Qvisling}
{\author Helge K\'e5re Fauskanger}}\paperw12240\paperh15840\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab709
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs40 \cf0 Evandilyon Matt\'e9o\
\
Gospel of Matthew\

\fs24 \

\f1\i\fs20 Revision of January 31, 2018\

\f0\i0\fs24 \
RANTA 1\

\f2\b0 Ontaleparma Y\'e9sus Hristo, Laviro yondo, Avrah\'e1mo yondo: 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Avraham \'f3ne \'cdsac, ar \'cdsac \'f3ne Y\'e1cov, ar Y\'e1cov \'f3ne Yeh\'fara ar h\'e1noryar, 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Yeh\'fara \'f3ne Peres ar Sera as Tamar, ar Peres \'f3ne Hesron, ar Hesron \'f3ne Ram, 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  ar Ram \'f3ne Amminarav, ar Amminarav \'f3ne Naxon, ar Naxon \'f3ne Salmon, 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  ar Salmon \'f3ne Voas as R\'e1hav, ar Voas \'f3ne \'d3ver as R\'fat, ar \'d3ver \'f3ne Yesse, 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  ar Yesse \'f3ne Lavir i aran. Ar Lavir \'f3ne Solomon i verinen \'dario, 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  ar Solomon \'f3ne Reh\'f3voam, ar Reh\'f3voam \'f3ne \'c1via, ar \'c1via \'f3ne \'c1sa, 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  ar \'c1sa \'f3ne Y\'f3hyafat, ar Y\'f3hyafat \'f3ne Y\'f3ram, ar Y\'f3ram \'f3ne Ussia, 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  ar Ussia \'f3ne Y\'f3tam, ar Y\'f3tam \'f3ne \'c1\uc0\u295 as, ar \'c1\u295 as \'f3ne \u294 esecia, 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  ar \uc0\u294 esecia \'f3ne Manasse, ar Manasse \'f3ne \'c1mon, ar \'c1mon \'f3ne Yos\'eda, 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  ar Yos\'eda \'f3ne Yeconya ar h\'e1noryar, i l\'famesse ya i lie n\'e1ne tulyana oa ve etyar V\'e1velenna.\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 1\

\f3\b0 Genealogy [
\f1\b ontaleparma
\f3\b0 , descent-book] of Jesus Christ, David's son, Abraham's son: 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jakob begat Juda [Jehuda] and his brothers, 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  Juda begat Perez and Zerah with Tamar, and Perez begat Hezron, and Hezron begat Ram, 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  and Ram begat Amminadab, and Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon, 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  and Salmon begat Boaz with Rahab, and Boaz begat Obed with Ruth, and Obed begat Jesse, 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  and Jesse begat David the king. And David begat Solomon by the wife of Uriah, 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  and Solomon begat Rehoboam, and Rehoboam begat Abijah, and Abijah begat Asa, 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  and Asa begat Joshaphat, and Joshaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat Uzziah, 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  and Uzziah begat Jotham, and Jotham begat Ahaz, and Ahaz begat Hezekiah, 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  and Hezeciah begat Manasseh, and Manasseh begat Amon, and Amon begat Jeconiah and his brothers, at the time that the people was led away as exiles to Babel [Babylon].\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Apa i *autulyale V\'e1velenna Yeconya \'f3ne Hyealtiel, ar Hyealtiel \'f3ne Seruv\'e1vel, 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  ar Seruv\'e1vel \'f3ne \'c1viur, ar \'c1viur \'f3ne Elyacim, ar Elyacim \'f3ne \'c1sor, 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  ar \'c1sor \'f3ne S\'e1roc, ar S\'e1roc \'f3ne \'c1cim, ar \'c1cim \'f3ne Eliur, 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  ar Eliur \'f3ne Ele\'e1sar, ar Ele\'e1sar \'f3ne Mattan, ar Mattan \'f3ne Y\'e1cov, 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  ar Y\'e1cov \'f3ne Y\'f3sef verurya Mar\'eda, lo ye Y\'e9sus, ye n\'e1 estaina Hristo, n\'e1ne n\'f3na.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 12
\f3\b0  After the deportation to Babel Jeconiah begat Shealtiel, and Shealtiel begat Zerubbabel, 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  and Zerubbabel begad Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor, 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  and Azor begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud, 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  and Eliud begat Eleazar, ar Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob, 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  and Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary [
\f1\b Mar\'eda
\f3\b0 ], by whom Jesus, who is called Christ, was born. \

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Sie ilye i *n\'f3nari Avrahamello Lavirenna n\'e1ner canaque, ar Lavirello i *autulyalenna V\'e1velenna ear *n\'f3nari canaque, ar i *autulyalello V\'e1velenna i Hristonna *n\'f3nari canaque. \
	
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus Hristo n\'e1ne n\'f3na mi l\'e9 sina: \'cdre amillerya Mar\'eda n\'e1ne nauta vestien Y\'f3sef, anes h\'edrina as h\'edna i Aire Feanen, n\'f3 anette *ertane. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'f3sef verurya, ye n\'e1ne faila ar ua merne nucume se, merne lerya se nuldave. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Mal apa sannes sin, y\'e9! i Heruo vala t\'fale senna oloresse, qu\'e9tala: \'93Y\'f3sef Lavirion, \'e1va ruce mapiello Mar\'eda verilya coalyanna, an ya n\'e1 nostana sesse i Aire Feanen n\'e1. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Coluvas yondo, ar estuvalyes Y\'e9sus, an etelehtuvas lierya \'facariltallon!\'94 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Ilye sine nati martaner carien nanwa ya i Heru carampe terc\'e1noryanen, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  \'93Y\'e9! i vende nauva as h\'edna ar coluva yondo, ar antauvalte sen i esse Immanuel\'94 \'96 ya tea \'93Aselve Eru\'94. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'f3sef, apa cuivierya h\'fameryallo, carne ve i Heruo vala cannelyane sen, ar nampes verirya coaryanna. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Mal uas sinte se n\'f3 coldes yondo, ar antanes sen i esse Y\'e9sus.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 17
\f3\b0  Thus all the generations from Abraham to David were fourteen, and from David to the deportation to Babel there are fourteen generations, and from the deportation to Babel to Christ fourteen generations.\
	
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  But Jesus Christ was born in this manner: When his mother Mary was obliged to marry Joseph, she was found [to be] with child by Holy Spirit, before they were united. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  But Joseph her husband, who was just and did not wish to humiliate her, wanted to release her secretly. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  But after he thought this, behold! the Lord's angel came to him in a dream, saying: \'93Joseph son of David, do not be afraid of taking Mary your wife to your house, for [that] which is conceived in her is by the Holy Spirit. 
\f1\b 21 
\f3\b0 She will bear a son, and you will name him Jesus, for he will deliver his people from their sins.\'94 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  All these things happened in order to make true [that] which the Lord said by his herald [or, prophet], saying: 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  \'93Behold! the maiden will be with child and will bear a son, and they will give him the name Immanuel\'94 \'96 which means \'93With us [is] God.\'94 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  Then Joseph, after his awakening from his sleep, did as the Lord's angel had commanded him, and he took his wife to his house. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  But he did not know her before she bore a son, and he gave him the name Jesus.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 2\

\f2\b0 Apa Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne n\'f3na Vet-Lehemesse Y\'fareo, mi Herol i arano r\'ed, en! elentirmor r\'f3menye m\'e9nallon t\'faler Yer\'fasalemenna, 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93Masse n\'e1 ye anaie n\'f3na aran Y\'fararon? An R\'f3messe cennelme tinwerya, ar ut\'falielme luhtien epe se!\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  \'cdre hlasses si, Aran Herol n\'e1ne valtaina, ar quanda Yer\'fasalem \'f3se, 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  ar comyala ilye i h\'e9re *airimor ar i parmangolmor im\'edca i lie, maquentes t\'e9na pa masse i Hristo nauvane n\'f3na. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Quentelte senna: \'93Vet-Lehemesse Y\'fareo, an sie n\'e1 t\'e9cina lo i *Eruterc\'e1no: 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  'Ar elye, Vet-Lehem Y\'fareo, laume n\'e1 i ampitya im\'edca i c\'e1nor Y\'fareo; an elyello tuluva t\'faro, ye nauva mavar Israel lienyan.' \'94\

\f3\i \

\f1\b CHAPTER 2\
\pard\pardeftab709\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f3\b0 \cf0 After Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king, behold! star-gazers from eastern regions came to Jerusalem, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  saying: \'93Where is [the one] who has been born king of the Jews? For in the East we saw his star, and we have come to bow before him.\'94 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  When he heard this, King Herod was stirred up, and all of Jerusalem with him, 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  and gathering all the chief priests and the scribes among the people, he asked them about where the Christ was to be born. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  They said to him: \'93In Bethlehem of Judea, for so [it] is written by the prophet: 'And you, Bethlehem of Judea, is by no means the smallest among the governors of Judea; for from you shall come a ruler, who will be a shepherd for my people Israel.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Herol nuldave tultane i elentirmor ar maquente te pa i minya l\'fa ya cennelte i tinwe. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Te-mentanes Vet-Lehemenna qu\'e9tala: \'93Mena, \'e1 cesta i h\'edna, ar \'edre ih\'edrieldes, nyara nin, polienyan lelya luhtien senna, y\'fa inye!\'94 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  \'cdre hlasselte i aran lendelte oa, ar y\'e9! i tinwe ya cennelyanelte R\'f3messe lende epe te, tenna pustanes or i n\'f3me yasse enge i h\'edna. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Cenie i tinwe antane tien t\'fara alasse. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Lendelte mir i coa ar cenner i h\'edna as Mar\'eda amillerya, ar lantala undu luhtanelte senna. Pantanelte harmaltar ar antaner sen annali: malta ar *ninquima ar n\'ed\uc0\u351 ima suhte.\
	
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Mal \'edre n\'e1ne tien ny\'e1rina oloresse pa i raxe nanweni\'e9no Herolenna, lendelte n\'f3reltanna hyana mallenen.  \
\
	
\f1\i\b 7 
\f3\b0 Then Herod secretly summoned the star-gazers and asked them about the first time that they saw the star. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  He sent them to Bethlehem saying: \'93Go, seek the child, and when you have found him, tell me, for me to be able to go to bow before him, I as well.\'94 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  When they heard the king they went away, and look! the star that they had seen in the East went before them, until it stopped above the place where the child was. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Seeing the star gave them great joy. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  They went inside the house and saw the child with Mary its mother, and falling down they bowed to him. They opened their treasures and gave to him gifts: gold and frankincense and fragrant resin.\
	
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  But when they were told [lit. when it was told to them] in a dream about the danger of returning to Herod, they went to their land by another road.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Apa oantelte, y\'e9! H\'e9ru vala tannexe Y\'f3sefen oloresse, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1 orta, \'e1 mapa i h\'edna ar amillerya ar u\uc0\u351 a Mirrandorenna, ar \'e1 lemya tasse tenna quetuvan lyenna; an Herol cestuva i h\'edna nehtien se!\'94 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ar orontes ar nampe i h\'edna ar amillerya \'f3se l\'f3misse, ar oantes Mirrandorenna, 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  ar lemnes tasse tenna Herolo qualme. Sie n\'e1ne carna anwa ya qu\'e9tina n\'e9 lo i Heru terc\'e1noryanen, qu\'e9tala: \'93Et Mirrandorello yallen yondonya!\'94\
\
	
\f3\i After they went away, look! an angel of the Lord showed himself to Joseph in a dream, saying: \'93Rise, take the child and its mother and flee to Egypt, and remain there until I shall tell you; for Herod will seek the child to kill it.\'94 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  And he arose and took the child and its mother with him at night, and he went away to Egypt, 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  and he remained there until Herod's death. Thus was made true what was said by the Lord through [
\f1\b -nen
\f3\b0 ] his prophet [
\f1\b terc\'e1no
\f3\b0 , herald], saying: \'93Out of Egypt I called my son.\'94\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Herol, c\'e9nala i anes carna auco lo i elentirmor, n\'e1ne qu\'e1tina t\'fara ahanen, ar mentanes ohtalli nehtien ilye seldor Vet-Lehemesse ar ilye i m\'e9nassen pelila sa, ho loa atta ar nu ta, ve i l\'fame pa ya camnelyanes istya i elentirmollon. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  T\'e1 n\'e1ne carna anwa ya qu\'e9tina n\'e9 ter Yerem\'eda i Eruterc\'e1no, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  \'93\'d3ma n\'e1ne hl\'e1rina Ramasse, yaime ar t\'fara nainie \'96 R\'e1\uc0\u295 el yaimea h\'ednaryain, ar uas merne tiutale, an nalte vanwe!\'94\
	
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Apa Herolo qualme, en! H\'e9ru vala tannexe Y\'f3sefen mi olos Mirrandoresse, 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  ar eques: \'93\'c1 orta, \'e1 mapa i h\'edna ar mena mir Isra\'e9lo n\'f3re, an i merner mapa i h\'edno cuile nar qualini!\'94 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Orontes ar nampe i h\'edna ar amillerya ar lende mir Isra\'e9lo n\'f3re. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Mal \'edre hlasses i Arcela\'fcs turne Y\'fareasse n\'f3messe Herol ataryo, runces meniello tar. Oloresse n\'e1ne sen ny\'e1rina pa raxerya, ar oantes mir i m\'e9na Al\'edleo. 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  T\'fales ar marne ostosse estaina N\'e1saret, carien nanwa ya n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina ter i Eruterc\'e1nor: \'93Nauvas estaina N\'e1sarya!\'94\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 16 
\f3\b0 Then Herod, seeing that he was made a fool by the star-gazers, was filled with great rage, and he sent soldiers [
\f1\b ohtar-li > ohtalli
\f3\b0 ] to kill all boys in Bethlehem and in all the regions surrounding it, from two years and under that, according to the time of which he had received knowledge from the star-gazers. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Then was made true [that] which was spoken through Jeremiah the Prophet, saying: 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  \'93A voice was heard in Rama, wailing and great lament \'96 Rachel wailing for her children, and she did not want comfort, for they are gone.\'94\
	
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  After Herod's death, behold! an angel of the Lord showed himself to Joseph in a dream in Egypt, 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  and he said: \'93Rise, take the child and go into the land of Israel, for those who want to take the child's life are dead.\'94 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  He arose and took the child and its mother and went into the land of Israel. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  But when he heard that Arcelaus ruled in Judea in the place of Herod his father, he feared to go there. In a dream he was told about his danger, and he went away into the region of Galilee. 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  He came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, to make true [that] which was spoken through the prophets: \'93He will be called a Nazarene.\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b \
RANTA 3\

\f2\b0 Yane auressen t\'fale Yoh\'e1no i *Sumbando, carala sinwa mi ravanda Y\'fareo: 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  \'93Hira inwis, an menelo aranie ut\'falie hare!\'94 
\f0\b 3 
\f2\b0 An n\'e9r sina n\'e1ne pa ye carampe Yesaia i Eruterc\'e1no \'edre quentes: \'93I \'f3ma queno y\'e1mala i ravandasse: Alde manwa i Heruo malle, cara tieryar t\'e9re!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 4
\f2\b0  Yoh\'e1no n\'e1ne vaina collasse find\'edva ulumpion ar s\'e1me  *aluquilta *os osweryar, ar matsorya n\'e1ne *salquec\'e1por ar verca lis. 
\f0\b 5 
\f2\b0 T\'e1 Yer\'fasalem ar quanda Y\'farea ar i quanda n\'f3re pelila Yordan etelender senna, 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  ar anelte sumbane lo s\'e9 Yordan\'b7s\'edresse, *etequ\'e9tala \'facareltar. \
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 3\

\f3\b0 In those days came John the Baptist, making known in the wilderness of Judea: \'93Find repentance, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.\'94 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  For this man was [the one] of whom Isaiah the Prophet spoke when he said: \'93The voice of person crying in the wilderness: You are to prepare the Lord's way, make his paths straight!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0
\cf0 John was wrapped in a cloak of hairs of camels and had a leather-belt around his hips, and his food was grasshoppers and wild honey. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Then Jerusalem and all of Judea and the entire land surrounding Jordan went out to him, 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  and they were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f0\i0\b \cf0 7
\f2\b0  \'cdre cennes rimbe Farisali ar Sand\'faceali t\'fala i sumbienna, quentes t\'e9na: \'93N\'f3nar laucion, man peantane len u\uc0\u351 e i t\'falala r\'fa\u351 ello? 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  T\'e1 cola y\'e1ve valda i inwisso! 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar \'e1va sana i lertalde quete indenna: 'Atarelva Avraham n\'e1' \'96 an inye quete lenna in Eru pole orta ama h\'edni Avrah\'e1men sine sarnillon. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Yando s\'ed i pelecco c\'e1ya ara \uc0\u351 undor i aldaron: Sie ilya alda ya ua cole m\'e1ra y\'e1ve nauva c\'edrina undu ar h\'e1tina mir i n\'e1re. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Inye sumba le nennen, mir inwis. Mal ye tuluva apa ni n\'e1 taura epe ni \'96 inye ua valda mapa i hyapatu talyalto. S\'e9 le-sumbuva Aire Feanen ar n\'e1renen. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  *Saltamarya ea m\'e1ryasse, ar poituvas *vattarestarya. Comyauvas orirya mir i haura, mal i *ospor urtauvas n\'e1renen ya \'faquen pole *luhtya.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 7
\f3\b0  When he saw many Pharisees and Sadducees come to the baptism, he said to them: \'93Offspring of serpents, who taught you to escape from the coming wrath? 
\f1\b 8 
\f3\b0 Then bear fruit worthy of the repentance! 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And do not think that you may say to yourselves: 'Our father is Abraham' \'96 for I say to you that God can rise up children to Abraham from these stones. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Even now the ax is lying by the roots of the trees: Thus every three that does not bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  I baptize you with water, into repentance. But [the one] that comes after me is mightier than I \'96 I am not worthy to take the shoes from his feet. He will baptize you with Holy Spirit and with fire. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will cleanse his threshing floor. He will gather his grain into the store, but the chaff he will burn with a fire that nobody can extinguish.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f0\i0\b \cf0 13
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus lende Al\'edleallo Yordanna ar t\'fale Yoh\'e1nonna n\'e1ven sumbana lo se. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Mal Yoh\'e1no v\'e1quente senna, ar eques: \'93Maurenya n\'e1 i inye nauva sumbana lo ly\'e9, ar elye t\'fala ninna!\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Mal hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente: \'93\'c1san lave marta, an sie n\'e1 vent vanima care ilqua ya faila n\'e1!\'94 T\'e1 h\'e9 l\'e1ve sen. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Apa Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne sumbana t\'fales t\'e9rave et i nenello, ar y\'e9! menel n\'e1ne sen pantana, ar cennes Eruo Faire t\'fala undu senna ve cucua. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Y\'e9! y\'fa enge \'f3ma menello ya quente: \'93Si n\'e1 yondonya, i melda, yenen nanye fastana!\'94 \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 13
\f3\b0  Then Jesus went from Galilee to Jordan and came to John to be baptized by him. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  But John denied him, and he said: \'93My need is that I will be baptized by you, and you are coming to me!\'94
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  But in answer Jesus said: \'93Allow it to happen, for thus it is proper for us [dual] to do everything that is just.\'94 Then he allowed him [to come]. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  After Jesus was baptized he came straightway out of the water, and behold! heaven was opened to him, and he saw God's Spirit coming down upon him like a dove. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Behold! [there] was also a voice from heaven that said: \'93This is my son, the beloved, with [lit. by] whom I am pleased!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 \

\f0\b RANTA 4\

\f2\b0 T\'e1 Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne tulyana lo i Faire ama mir i erume, n\'e1ven sahtana lo i Arauco. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Uas mante auressen *canaquean ar l\'f3missen *canaquean, ar apa l\'fame sina anes maita. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar i *Sahtando t\'fale senna ar quente: \'93Qui elye Eruo yondo n\'e1, queta sine sarninnar: Ola massar!\'94 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Mal hanquentasse quentes: \'93N\'e1 t\'e9cina: Atan ua coita rie massanen, mal ilya quettanen ya tule Eruo antollo!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 5
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i Arauco se-talle i aire ostonna ar se-panyane i cordo telmasse. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Quentes senna: \'93Qui elye Eruo yondo n\'e1, hata inse undu, an n\'e1 t\'e9cina: Canuvas valaryain pa lye, ar coluvaltel m\'e1ltatse, pustien talelya petiello sarnenna!\'94 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Eque Y\'e9sus: \'93Ata n\'e1 t\'e9cina: \'c1va tyasta i Heru Ainolya!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 CHAPTER 4\

\f3\b0 Then Jesus was led by the spirit up into the desert, to be tempted by the Devil. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  He did not eat for forty days and forty nights, and after this time he was hungry. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And the Tempter came to him and said: \'93If you are God's son, say to these stones: Become breads!\'94 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  But in answer he said: \'93It is written: Man does not live only by bread, but by every word that comes from God's mouth.\'94\
	
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Then the Devil led him to the holy city and put him at the pinnacle of the temple. He said to him: \'93If you are God's son, throw yourself down, for [it] is written: He will command his angels concerning you, and they will carry you on their hands, to stop your foot from striking against [any] stone.\'94 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  Jesus said: \'93Again [it] is written: Do not test the Lord your God!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f0\i0\b \cf0 8
\f2\b0  Ata i Arauco se-talle ita t\'e1ra orontenna, ar tanne sen ilye i aranier cemeno ar alcarelta. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar quentes senna: \'93Ilye nati sine antauvan elyen qui lantal undu ar *tyeril ni!\'94 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Heca, S\'e1tan! An n\'e1 t\'e9cina: I Heru Ainolya alye *tyera, ar s\'e9 erinqua alye *veuya!\'94 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i Arauco oante sello, ar y\'e9! valali t\'faler ar *veuyaner se.\

\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Apa hlarie i Yoh\'e1no n\'e1ne panyana mandosse, lendes oa mir Al\'edlea. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Oantes N\'e1saretello ar t\'fale ar marne Capernaumesse ara ear, Sevulondo ar Naftalio m\'e9nassen, 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  carien anwa ya n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina ter Yesaia i Eruterc\'e1no \'edre quentes: 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  \'93A n\'f3re Sevulondo ar Naftalio, i earmalle Yordan pella, Al\'edlea i n\'f3rion! 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  I lie h\'e1mala morniesse cenne hoa cala, ar in hamner \'f1uruhuineo m\'e9nasse cala oronte!\'94 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  L\'fame yanallo carnes mentarya sinwa ar quente: \'93Hira inwis, an menelo aranie ut\'falie hare!\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 8
\f3\b0  Again the Devil brought him to an extremely high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of earth and their glory. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And he said to him: \'93All these things I will give to you if you fall down and you worship me.\'94 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Then Jesus said to him: \'93Begone, Satan! For [it] is written: The Lord your God you are to worship, and he alone you are to serve.\'94 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  Then the Devil went away from him, and behold! angels came and served him.\
	
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  After hearing that John was put in prison, he went off into Galilee. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  He went away from Nazareth and came and dwelt in Capernaum beside [the] sea, in Zebulon's and Naphtali's regions, 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  to make true [that] which was said through Isaiah the Prophet when he said: 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  \'93O land of Zebulon and Naphtali, the sea-road beyond Jordan, Galilee of the nations! 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  The people sitting in darkness saw a great light, and to [those] who sat in the region of death-shadow, light arose.\'94 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  From that time he made his message known and said: \'93Find repentance, for the kingdom of heaven has come near!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 \

\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Vantala ara Ear Al\'edleo cennes h\'e1no atta, S\'edmon ye n\'e1 estaina P\'e9ter ar Andr\'e9as h\'e1norya, h\'e1tala rembe mir i ear, an anette *raitoli. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ar quentes t\'fana: \'93Tula, \'e1ni hilya, ar caruvan let *raitoli atanion!\'94 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  M\'ed imya l\'fa hehtanette rembetta ar se-hilyanet. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Lelyala talo cennes y\'fa exe atta yet n\'e1net h\'e1nor, Y\'e1cov Severaion ar Yohannes h\'e1norya, i luntesse as Severai ataretta, envinyat\'e1la rembettar \'96 ar yaldeset. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Mi imya l\'fa hehtanette i lunte ar ataretta, ar hilyanettes.\

\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Ar lendes ter quanda Al\'edlea, peantala *yomencoaltassen ar carila sinwa i evandilyon pa i aranie ar nestala ilya hl\'edve ar ilya qu\'e1me im\'edca i lie. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Ar i nyarie pa se lende mir quanda S\'edria, ar tulunelte senna ilye engwar, nwalyaine hl\'edvel\'ednen ar nwalmel\'ednen rimbe nostaleron: raucoharyainali ar r\'e1nahlaiwali ar taptali \'96 ar nestanes te. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Ar hoe \uc0\u351 angar se-hilyaner, ho Al\'edlea ar i Ostor Quean ar Yer\'fasalem ar Y\'farea, ar i n\'f3riello Yordan pella.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 18
\f3\b0  Walking by the Sea of Galilee he saw two brothers, Simon who is called Peter and Andrew his brother, throwing a net into the sea, for they [dual] were fishers. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93Come, follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.\'94 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  In the same moment they left their net and followed him. 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  Going from there he saw also two others who were brothers, James [/Jacob] son of Zebedee and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their [dual] father, repairing their nets \'96 and he called them. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  In the same moment they abandoned the boat and their father, and followed him.\
	
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  And he went through all of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and making known the gospel about the kingdom and healing every illness and every sickness among the people. 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  And the story about him went into all of Syria, and they brought to him all ill ones, tormented by illnesses and by torments of many kinds: demon-possessed ones and moon-sick ones and impeded ones \'96 and he healed them. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  And great crowds followed him, from Galile and the Ten Cities and Jerusalem and Judea, and from the country beyond the Jordan.\
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 \

\f0\b RANTA 5\

\f2\b0 C\'e9nala i \uc0\u351 angar lendes ama mir i oron, ar \'edre hamunes hildoryar t\'faler senna. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar pantanes antorya ar peantane tien, qu\'e9tala:\
	
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  \'93Valime nar i penyar fairesse, an t\'e9 haryuvar menelo aranie!\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Valime nar i samir naire, an t\'e9 nauvar tiutane!\
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Valime nar i moicar, an t\'e9 nauvar aryoni cemeno!\
	
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Valime nar i maitar ar soicar failien, an t\'e9 nauvar qu\'e1tine!\
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Valime nar i antar oravie, an t\'e9 camuvar oravie!\
	
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Valime nar i poicar endo, an t\'e9 cenuvar Eru!\
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Valime nar i carir raine, an t\'e9 nauvar estaine Eruo yondor!\
	
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Valime nar i roitainar faili\'e9nen, an tien menelo aranie n\'e1!\
	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Valime nalde \'edre queni le-naityar ar le-roitar ar h\'farala quetir ilya ulco pa le, castanyanen. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Alde na valime ar capa alassenen, an hoa n\'e1 *paityalelda menelde.\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 5\

\f3\b0 Seeing the crowds he went up into the mountain, and when he sat down his disciples came to him. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And he opened his mouth and instructed them, saying:\
	
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  \'93Happy are the lacking ones in spirit, for they will possess the kingdom of heaven!\
	
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  Happy are the ones that have grief, for they shall be comforted!\
	
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Happy are the gentle ones, for they shall be heirs of earth!\
	
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  Happy are the ones hungry and thirsty for righteousness, for they shall be filled!\
	
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  Happy are the ones that give mercy, for they will receive mercy!\
	
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Happy are the pure of heart, for they shall see God!\
	
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Happy are the ones that make peace, or they will be called God's sons!\
	
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Happy are the ones persecuted because of righteousness, for the kingdom of heaven is for them!\
	
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  Happy are you when people abuse you and persecute you and lying say every evil about you, by reason of me. You be happy and leap for joy, for great is your reward in heaven.\

\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 13
\f2\b0  Elde nar cemeno singe; mal qui i poldore auta i singello, manen singwa ty\'e1verya nanwenuva? Uas ambe m\'e1ra erya naten, mal n\'e1 h\'e1tina ettenna, yasse queni *vattuvar sanna.\
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0
\cf0 	
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Elde nar i mardo cala. Osto orontesse ua c\'favima. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Mo ua narta calma ar sa-panya nu calpa, mal i calmatarmasse, ar caltas ilquenna i coasse. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Sie y\'fa elde tyara calalda calta atannar, polieltan cene m\'e1re cardaldar ar antaveltan alcar Atareldan, ye ea menelde.\
	
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  \'c1va sana in inye ut\'falie mapien oa i \uc0\u350 anye hya i Eruterc\'e1nor. Uan ut\'falie mapien oa, mal carien nanwa! 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  An quetin lenna i menel cemenye autuvat n\'f3 erya ampitya tengwa hya erya tehta autuva i \uc0\u350 anyello, n\'f3 ilqua anaie carna nanwa. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Sie, ilquen ye race er mici i ampitye axani ar peanta atanin sie, isse nauva estaina i ampitya, menelo araniesse. Mal ilquen ye hilya sa ar peanta exi pa sa, isse nauva estaina t\'fara menelo araniesse. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  An quetin lenna i qui failielda ua t\'fara epe i failie i parmangolmoron ar i Farisaron, laume tuluvalde mir menelo aranie. \
\
	
\f1\i\b 13
\f3\b0  You are the salt of earth; but if the strength goes away from the salt, how will its salty taste come back? It is not [any]more good for a single thing, but is thrown outside, where people will trample upon it.\
	
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  You are the world's light. A city upon a mountain is not possible to hide. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  One does not light a lamp and put it under a vessel, but on the lampstand, and it shines on everyone in the house. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  Thus you as well cause your light to shine upon men, for them to see your good deeds and for them to give glory to your Father, who is in heaven.\
	
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Do not think that I have come to take away the Law or the Prophets. I have not come to take away, but to make real! 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  For I say to you that heaven and earth will pass [away] before a single smallest letter or a single mark [
\f1\b tehta
\f3\b0 : diacritic] will pass away from the Law, before everything has been made true. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Thus, everyone that breaks one among the smallest commandments and teaches men so, he will be called the smallest, in the kingdom of heaven. But everyone who follows it and instructs others about it, he shall he called great in the kingdom of heaven.
\f1\b  20
\f3\b0  For I say to you that of your righteousness is not greater than the righteousness of the scribes and the Pharisees, you will by no means come into the kingdom of heaven.\

\f2\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 21
\f2\b0  Hlasselde i n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina i y\'e1rannar: \'c1va nahta; mal aiquen ye \'e9 nahta tuluva nu namie!  
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Mal inye quete lenna in aiquen ye n\'e1 r\'fa\uc0\u351 ea h\'e1noryanna tuluva nu namie, ar ilquen ye quete h\'e1noryanna: '\ul R\'e1ca\ulnone !' nauva n\'e1mina lo i T\'e1ra Ocombe, mal aiquen ye quete 'Auco!' nauva martyana  Ehenno n\'e1ren!\

\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Qui, t\'e1, t\'falal i *yangwanna t\'e1lala annalya, ar tasse enyalil i h\'e1nolya same costie aselye, 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  alye hehta annalya tasse epe i *yangwa, ar mena oa: Minyave cara rainelya as h\'e1nolya, ar t\'e1, \'edre enut\'faliel, lertal tala annalya. \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 21
\f3\b0  You heard that [it] was said to the old ones: Do not kill, but anyone that does kill will come under judgement! 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  But I say to you that anyone who is angry with [or \'93against\'94, -
\f1\b nna
\f3\b0 ] his brother will come under judgement, and anyone who says to his brother: '\ul R\'e1ca\ulnone ' [= Semitic word of contempt] will be judged by the High Council, but anyone who says: 'Fool!' will be destined for Gehenna's fire!\
	
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  If, then, you are coming to the altar bringing your gift, and there you recall that your brother has a quarrel with you, 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  you are to leave your gift there before the altar, and go away: First make your peace with your brother, and then, when you have returned, you may bring your gift.  \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 \

\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Na linta carien raine as \'f1ottolya lan en nalye \'f3se i mallesse \'96 hya i \'f1otto antauva lye olla i n\'e1mon, ar i n\'e1mo i *n\'e1monduren, ar nalye h\'e1tina mir mando. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lyenna: Laume tulil et talo n\'f3 apaitielye i m\'e9tima pitya mitta tyelpeva!\

\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Ahl\'e1rielde i anaie qu\'e9tina: '\'c1va race vestale!' 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Mal inye quete lenna in ilquen ye y\'e9ta n\'eds milyala se, yando t\'e1 ar\'e1cie vestale \'f3se endaryasse.\
\
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f1\i\b \cf0 25
\f3\b0  Be quick to make peace with your enemy while you are still with him on the road \'96 or the enemy will give you over to the judge, and the judge to the court attendant [
\f1\b n\'e1mondur: 
\f3\b0 judge-servant], and you will be thrown into prison. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you: You will not come out from there before you have payed the last small piece of silver!\
	
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  You have heard that it has been said: 'Do not break marriage!' But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman longing for her, has even then broken marriage with her in his heart. \
\pard\pardeftab709\fi708\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 \

\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Qui forya hendelya le-sahta, \'e1sa narca ettenna ar \'e1sa hate oa lyello! An qui er mici hroamittalyar vanwa n\'e1, ta n\'e1 len arya epe i quanda hroalya n\'e1 h\'e1tina mir Ehenna. 
\f0\b 30 
\f2\b0 Ar qui formalya lye-sahta, \'e1sa aucire ar \'e1sa hate lyello. An qui er mici hroamittalyar vanwa n\'e1, ta n\'e1 len arya epe i quanda hroalya tule mir Ehenna.\
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0
\cf0 	
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  N\'e1 qu\'e9taina: Mauya yen lehtaxe veriryallo sen-anta tecie *aumentav\'e9va. 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Mal inye quete lenna: Ilquen ye lehtaxe veriryallo hequa castanen \'fapuhti\'e9va, tyare se race vestale. Ar ye verya nissenna ye anaie mentana oa, race vestale.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 29
\f3\b0  If your right eye seduces you, tear it out and throw it away from you! For if one among your body parts is lost, that is for you better than that your entire body is thrown into Gehenna. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  And if your right hand seduces you, cut it off and throw it away from you. For if one among your body-parts is lost, that is for you better than that your entire body comes into Gehenna.\
	
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  It is said: It is necessary for the one who divorces [lit. loosens himself from] his wife to give her a writing of divorce [
\f1\b aumentave
\f3\b0 , away-sending]. But I say to you: Everyone who divorces his wife except by reason of fonication, causes her to break marriage. And who gets married to a woman who has been sent away, breaks marriage.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Ente, ahl\'e1rielde i n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina i y\'e1rannar: \'c1va anta h\'farala vanda, mal hepa i H\'e9run i vandar yar \'e1niel. 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  Mal inye quete lenna: Aqua \'e1va anta vandar, l\'e1 menelden, an nas i mahalma Eruva, 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  hya cemennen, an nas i tulco talyant, hya Yer\'fasalemnen, an nas osto i taura aranwa.\
	
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  Yando \'e1va anta vandar carelyanen, an ualye pole care erya finde ninque hya morna. 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  Quetielya nauva n\'e1, n\'e1 \'96 l\'e1, l\'e1! Ya n\'e1 han si, ulcuo n\'e1.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 33
\f3\b0  Furthermore, you have heard that [it] was said to the old ones: \'93Do not give a lying oath, but keep for the Lord the oaths that you have given. 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  But I say to you: Do not give oaths at all, not by heaven [
\f1\b menel-nen
\f3\b0  > 
\f1\b menelden
\f3\b0 ], for it is the throne of God, 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  or by earth, for it is the support for his feet, or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the mighty king.\
	
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  Also do not give oaths by your head, for you cannot make a single hair white or black. 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0   Your speech will be yes, yes \'96 no, no! [That] which is beyond this, is of evil.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  Ahl\'e1rielde i anaie qu\'e9tina: Hen henden, ar nelet nelcen! 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  Mal inye quete lenna: \'c1va tare yenna care ulco lenna. Qui aiquen le-pete forya ventalyasse, quera y\'fa i exe senna. 
\f0\b 40
\f2\b0  Qui aiquen mere lelya n\'e1monna aselye mapien laupelya, \'e1sen lave mapa yando collalya. 
\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  Ar qui aiquen mauya lye hilya se *larnelta er, \'e1 lelya \'f3se *larnelta atta. 
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  \'c1 anta yen arca lyello, ar \'e1va quere imle yello mere *yuhta aiqua ya samil.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 38
\f3\b0  You have heard that [it] has been said: \'93An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth! 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  But I say to you: Do not stand against [he] that does evil to you. If anyone strikes you on your right chin, turn also the other one towards him. 
\f1\b 40
\f3\b0  If anyone wants to go to a judge with you to take your tunic, allow him to take also your cloak. 
\f1\b 41
\f3\b0  And if anyone compels you to follow him one mile, go with him two miles. 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  Give to [the one] who asks of you, and do not turn [Q: turn yourself] from [anyone] who wants to use anything that you have.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 43
\f2\b0  Ahl\'e1rielde i n\'e1 qu\'e9taina: Mela armarolya ar teva \'f1ottolya! 
\f0\b 44
\f2\b0  Mal inye quete lenna: Mela \'f1ottolyar, \'e1 aista i h\'fatar le, cara mai in le-tevir, ar hyama in le-roitar, 
\f0\b 45
\f2\b0  n\'e1veldan h\'edni Atareldo menelde. An isse tyare Anarya orta or ulcar ar mani, ar lave ulo lanta failannar ar \'fafailannar.\
	
\f0\b 46
\f2\b0  Qui melilde i melir le, mana *paityalelya? Ma i *tungwemor uar care i imya nat? 
\f0\b 47
\f2\b0  Ar qui *suilal rie h\'e1nolyar, manen si n\'e1 t\'fara nat? Ma queni i n\'f3rion uar care i imya?\
	
\f0\b 48
\f2\b0  Na, t\'e1, ilvane, tambe Atarelda menelde ilvana n\'e1.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 43
\f3\b0  You have heard that [it] is said: Love your neighbor and hate your enemy! 
\f1\b 44
\f3\b0  But I say to you: Love your enemies, bless the ones that curse you, do well to those that hate you, and pray for those that pursue you, 
\f1\b 45
\f3\b0  for you to be children of your Father in heaven. For he causes his sun to rise over wicked ones and good ones, and lets rain fall upon just ones and unjust ones.\
	
\f1\b 46
\f3\b0  If you love [those] who love you, what is your reward? Do not the tax collectors do the same thing? \
	
\f1\b 47
\f3\b0  And if you greet only your brothers, how is this a great thing? Do not people of the nations do the same?\
	
\f1\b 48
\f3\b0  Be, then, perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect.\

\f0\i0\b \
RANTA 6\

\f2\b0 Cima i ualde care failielda epe atani n\'e1ven t\'edraine lo t\'e9, hya ualde samuva *paityale Atareldallo menelde. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Etta, \'edre antal annar \'f3ravi\'e9va, \'e1va lamya r\'f3ma epe lye, ve i *imnetyandor carir i *yomencoassen ar i mallessen, camien alcar ho t\'e9. N\'e1sie quetin lenna: C\'e1malte quanda *paityalelta. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Mal elye, \'edre antal annar \'f3ravi\'e9va, \'e1va lave hyarmalyan ista ya formalya c\'e1ra; 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  sie annalyar \'f3ravi\'e9va nauvar nuldasse; t\'e1 Atarelya, ye t\'edra nuldasse, paityuva lyen.\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 6\

\f3\b0 Take heed that you do not do [/practice] your righteousness in front of men to be watched by them, or you will not have [any] reward from your Father in heaven. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  Therefore, when you give gifts of mercy, do not sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and on the roads, to receive glory [or, honor] from them. Truly I say to you: They are receiving their whole reward. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  But you, when you give gifts of mercy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing; 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  thus your gifts of mercy will be in secret; then your father, who is watching in secret, will reward you.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ente, \'edre hyamilde, \'e1va na ve i *imnatyandor, an melilte hyame \'edre t\'e1ralte i malleron vincassen, n\'e1ven c\'e9nime atanin. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna: C\'e1malte quanda *paityalelta. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Mal elye, ire hyamil, mena mir v\'e9ra \uc0\u351 ambelya, ar apa holtie fennalya, hyama Atarelyanna ye ea nuldasse; t\'e1 Atarelya ye nuldave t\'edra, paityuva lyen. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Mal \'edre hy\'e1mal, \'e1va quete i imye nati mi vorongandale, ve queni i n\'f3rion carir, an sanalte i nauvalte hl\'e1raine *yuhti\'e9nen rimbe quettali. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Etta, \'e1va na ve t\'e9, an Eru Atarelda ista maureldar n\'f3 arcalde senna.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 5
\f3\b0  Therefore, when you [pl.] pray, do not be like the hypocrites, for they love to pray when they are standing on the corners of the roads, in order to be visible to men. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  Truly I tell you: They are receiving their entire reward. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  But you [sg.], when you pray, go into your own room, and after closing your door, pray to your Father who is in secret; then your Father who is secretly watching, will pay you. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  But when you are praying, do not say the same things in monotonous repetition, as people of the [heathen] nations do, for they think that they will be being heard by using numerous words. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Therefore, do not be like them, for God your [pl.] Father know your needs before you request [anything] from him.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Hyama, t\'e1, sie: \'c1tarelma menelde, na aire esselya! 
\f0\b 10 
\f2\b0 Aranielya na tuluva! Na care ind\'f3melya cemende tambe menelde! 
\f0\b 11 
\f2\b0 \'c1men anta s\'edra ilaurea massalma, 
\f0\b 12 
\f2\b0 ar \'e1men apsene \'facarelvar s\'edve elme apsenir tai tien i \'facarir elmen. 
\f0\b 13 
\f2\b0 \'c1lame tulya \'fasahtienna mal \'e1me etelehta ulcullo! N\'e1sie!\
\
	
\f1\i\b 9
\f0\i0  
\f3\i\b0 Pray, then, thus: Our Father in heaven, holy be your name! 
\f1\b 10 
\f3\b0 Let your kingdom come! Let your will be done on earth as in heaven! 
\f1\b 11 
\f3\b0 Give us today our daily bread, 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  and forgive us our sins as we forgive them to them that sin against us. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Do not lead us into temptation but deliver us from evil! Amen!\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Qui apsenilde atanin ongweltar, y\'fa apsenuva len Atarelda menelde; 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  mal qui ualde apsene atanin, Atarelda mi imya l\'e9 ua apsenuva ongweldar len. \
	
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  \'cdre helpilde lamate, \'e1va na ve *imnatyandor, i carir cendelelta \'favanima carien lamatelta c\'e9nima atanin.  N\'e1sie quetin lenna: C\'e1malte quanda *paityalelta. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Mal elye, \'edre hepilde lamate, \'e1 panya millo carelyasse ar sova cendelelya. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Sie lamatelta ua nauva c\'e9nima atanin, mal Atarelyan ye ea nuldasse; ar Atarelya, ye nuldave t\'edra, paityuva len.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 14
\f3\b0  If you forgive men their crimes, your Father in heaven will also forgive you; 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  but if you do not forgive men, your Father will in the same manner not forgive your crimes to you.\
	
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  When you [pl.] keep a fast, do not be like the hypocrites, who make their face disfigured in order to make their fast visible to men. Truly I say to you: They are receiving their entire reward. 
\f1\b 17 
\f3\b0 But you [sg.], when you keep a fast, put oil on your head and wash your face. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  Thus your fasting will not be visible to men, but to your Father who is in secret; and your Father, who secretly is watching, will pay [/reward] you.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  \'c1va comya len harmar cemende, yasse malo ar \'f1warie ammatir, ar yasse arpor racir minna ar pilir. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Mal \'e1 comya len harmar menelde, yasse malo ar \'f1warie uar ammate, ar yasse arpor uar race minna ar pilir. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  An yasse harmalya ea, tasse y\'fa endalya euva.\
	
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Hroalyo calma n\'e1 i hen. Etta, qui hendelya n\'e1 m\'e1lesse, quanda hroalya nauva calima, 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  mal qui hendelya n\'e1 olca, quanda hroalya nauva morna. Qui i cala ya ea lyesse n\'e1 mornie, manen hoa i mornie n\'e1!\
\
	
\f1\i\b 19
\f3\b0  Do not gather for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and erosion devour, and where thieves break in and steal. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  But gather for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moth and erosion do not devour, and where thieves do not break in and steal. 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also. \
	
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  Your body's lamp is the eye. Therefore, if your eye is in health, your entire body will be bright, 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  but if your eye is wicked, your entire body will be dark. If the light that is in you is darkness, how great the darkness is!\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  *\'daquen pole n\'e1ve m\'f3l heru attan; tevuvas i mine ar meluva i exe, hya himyuvas i mine ar yeltuva i exe. Ualde pole n\'e1ve m\'f3li Erun ar Mammonden v\'e9la.\
	
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Etta quetin lenna: \'c1va na *tarastaine pa inde, pa mana matuvalde hya mana sucuvalde, hya pa hroalya, pa i lanni yar coluvalde. Ma i cuile ua amba epe matta ar i hroa epe i larmar? 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Cima menelo aiwi, i ualte rere hya *cirihta hya comya mir haurar, ananta meneldea Atarelda anta tien matta. Ma ualde valdie epe t\'e9? 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Man im\'edca le pole napane erya *perranga coivieryan? 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Ente, pa lanni, mana castalda n\'e1ven *tarastaine? Para i resto indilinen, manen ualte mole ar ualte lia, 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  mal nyarin len i Solomon alcareryasse \'fane t\'f3pina ve erya mici t\'e9. 
\f0\b 30 
\f2\b0 Qui Eru sie netya i olvar i restasse, i ear sisse s\'edra ar nauvar vanwe enwa, manen ita ambe l\'e1rave topuvas l\'e9, elde pitya savi\'e9no? 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Etta \'e1va na *tarastaine ar quete: \'93Mana matuvalve?\'94 hya \'93Mananen topuvalve inwe?\'94 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  An ilye nati sine i n\'f3ri roitar. Mal meneldea Atarelda ista i samilde maure ilye sine nativa.\

\f0\b 	33
\f2\b0  \'c1 cesta minyave i aranie ar failierya, ar ilye sine nati nauvar nap\'e1nine len. 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  Etta, \'e1va na *tarastaine pa i hilyala aure, an i hilyala aure samuva v\'e9re *tarastieryar. Ilya r\'e9o ulco farya san.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 24
\f3\b0  Nobody can be a slave for two lords; he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and loathe the other. You cannot be slaves for God and for Mammon alike.\
\pard\pardeftab709\sa120\partightenfactor0
\cf0 	
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  Therefore I say to you: Do not be troubled about yourselves, about what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies, concerning the clothers you will wear.  Is the life not more than food and the body than the clothes? 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  Notice the birds of heaven, that they do not sow or reap or gather into barns [
\f1\b haurar
\f3\b0 , stores], and yet your heavenly Father gives them food. Are you not more important than them? 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  Who among you can add a single cubit to his life? 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  Furthermore, concerning clothes, what is your reason for being troubled? Learn from [or 'by', -
\f1\b nen
\f3\b0 ] the lilies of the field, how they do not labour and do not twine [threads], 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  but I tell you that Solomon in his glory was not clad as a single [one] among them. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  If God so adorns the plants in the field, that exist today and will be gone tomorrow, how much more richly will he cover you, you of little faith? 
\f1\b 31 
\f3\b0 Therefore, do not be troubled and say: \'93What will we eat?\'94 or \'93With what are we to cover ourselves?\'94 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  For all these things the nations pursue. But your heavenly Father knows that you have need of all these things.\
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0
\cf0 	
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  Seek first the kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be added to you. 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  Therefore, do not be troubled about the following day, for the following day will have its own troubles. Every day's evil suffices for it.\

\f2\i0 \
\

\f0\b RANTA 7 \

\f2\b0 \'c1va name, l\'e1 n\'e1ven n\'e1mine, 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  an i n\'e1mi\'e9nen yanen n\'e1mal nauval n\'e1mina, ar i lestanen yanen *etelestal nauva *etelestana lyen. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  T\'e1 manen n\'e1 i y\'e9tal i lisce hanolyo hendesse, mal ua cime i pano v\'e9ra hendelyasse? 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Hya manen ece lyen quete h\'e1nolyanna: 'Lava nin tuce i lisce et hendetyallo', \'edre y\'e9! ea pano v\'e9ra hendelyasse? 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  *Imnetyando! Minyave tuca i pano et v\'e9ra hendelyallo, ar t\'e1 polil cene manen tuce i lisce et h\'e1nolyo hendello.\
	\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 7\

\f3\b0 Do not judge, so as not to be judged, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  for by the judgment with which you are judging you will be judged, and by the measure with which you measure out, [it] will be measured out to you. 
\f1\b 3 
\f3\b0 Then how is [it] that you look at the sedge in your brother's eye, but does not heed the rafter in your own eye? 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  Or how is it possible for you to say to your brother: 'Allow me to pull the sedge out of your eye', when behold! there is a rafter in your own eye? 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Hypocrite! First pull he rafter out from your own eye, and then you can see how to pull the sedge out of your brother's eye.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 	6
\f2\b0  \'c1va anta ya aire n\'e1 i huoin; mi imya l\'e9, \'e1va hate marillaldar epe polcar, hya *vattuvaltet nu talultar ar queruvar inte ar narcuvar le.\
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  \'c1 arca, ar nauva len antana; \'e1 cesta, ar hiruvalde, \'e1 tamba, ar nauva len latyana. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  An ilquen arcala came, ar ilquen cestala hire, ar ilquenen tambala nauva latyana. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Man im\'edca le, qui yondorya arca massa, antauva sen sar? 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Hya qui arcas lingwe \'96 lau antauvas sen leuca? 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Etta, qui elde i nar olce istar anta m\'e1re annar h\'ednaldain, manen ita ambe Atarelda ye ea menelde antauva m\'e1re nati in arcar sello?\
	
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Etta, ilye nati yar merilde c\'e1rine len lo atani, cara tien m\'ed imya l\'e9. Ta n\'e1 ya tear i \uc0\u350 anye ar i Eruterc\'e1nor.\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  Do not give what is holy to the dogs; in the same manner, do not throw your pearls before swine, or they will trample them under their feet and will turn themselves [around] and tear you [up].\
	
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  Ask, and [it] will be given you; seek, and you shall find, knock, and [it] will be opened to you. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking [it] will be opened. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Who among you, if his son asks for a bread, will give him a stone? 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Or if he asks for a fish \'96 surely he will not give him a snake? 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  Therefore, if you that are wicked know [how] to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those that ask of him?\
	
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  Therefore, all things that you want done to you by men, do them in the same manner. That is what the Law and the Prophets mean.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Mena minna ter i n\'e1ha ando, an palla ar yanda n\'e1 i malle ya tulya oa nancarienna, ar rimbe nar i menir minna ter sa, 
\f0\b 14 
\f2\b0 mal n\'e1ha n\'e1 i ando ar lenwa i malle tulyala mir coivie, ar mance nar i hirir sa.\
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Tira inde pa i *huruterc\'e1nor i tulir lenna m\'e1maron lannessen, mal mityasse nalte amm\'e1tala \'f1armor. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Y\'e1veltainen istuvaldet. Queni uar comya *tiumar necelillon hya *rely\'e1vi *nastalaimallon, l\'e1? 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Sie ilya m\'e1ra alda cole m\'e1ra y\'e1ve, mal ilya quelexima alda care \uc0\u351 aura y\'e1ve. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  M\'e1ra alda ua pole cole \'famirwa y\'e1ve; mi imya l\'e9, quelexima alda ua pole cole m\'e1ra y\'e1ve. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ilya alda ya ua cole m\'e1ra y\'e1ve n\'e1 c\'edrina undu ar h\'e1tina mir i n\'e1re. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  \'c9 y\'e1veltainen istuvaldet!\
	
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  L\'e1 ilquen ye quete ninna: Heru, Heru, tuluva mir menelo aranie, mal ye care i ind\'f3me Atarinyo ye ea menelde. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Rimbali quetuvar nin enta auresse: 'Heru, Heru, ma ualme quente ve Eruterc\'e1nor esselyanen, ar et-hanter raucor esselyanen, ar carner rimbe taurie cardali esselyanen?' 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Mal t\'e1 nyaruvan tien: 'Uan oi sinte le! Oa nillo, elde i racir i \uc0\u351 \'e1nye!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 13
\f3\b0  Go inside through the narrow gate, for broad and wide is the road that leads away to destruction, and numerous are the ones that go inside through it, 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  but narrow [
\f1\b n\'e1ha
\f3\b0 ] is the gate and narrow [or 'thin', 
\f1\b lenwa
\f3\b0 ] is the road leading into life, and few are [the ones] that find it. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  Watch yourselves concerning the false prophets that come to you in sheep's clothing, but on the inside they are devouring wolves. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  By their fruits you will know them. People do not gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles, no? 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Thus every good tree bears good fruit, but every rotten tree produces foul fruit. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  A good tree cannot bear worthless fruit; in the same manner, a rotten tree cannot bear good fruit. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  Indeed by their fruit you will know them! \
	
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  Not everyone who says to me: Lord, Lord, will come into the kingdom of heaven, but [the one] who does the will of my Father who is in heaven. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  Numerous ones will say to me in that day:  'Lord, Lord, did we not speak as prophets in your name, and throw out demons in your name, and do many mighty deeds in your name?' 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  But then I will tell them: 'I did not ever know you! Away from me, you who break the law!'\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Etta ilquen ye hlare sine quettanyar nauva ve handa n\'e9r, ye carastane coarya i ondosse. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Ar i ulo ulle undu, ar i oloiri t\'faler, ar i s\'fari v\'e1vaner ar penter coa tananna, mal uas lantane, an anes tulcana i ondosse. \

\f0\b 	26
\f2\b0  Ente, ilquen ye hlare sine quettanyar ar uar care ve tai n\'e1 ve \'fahanda n\'e9r, ye carastane coarya i litsesse. 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Ar i ulo ulle undu, ar i oloiri t\'faler, ar i s\'fari v\'e1vaner ar penter coa tananna, ar talantes, ar lantarya n\'e1ne hoa!\'94\
	
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  S\'ed \'edre Y\'e9sus telyane ilye quettar sine, i \uc0\u351 \'e1ngar n\'e1ner elmendasse peantieryanen, 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  an peantanes ve qu\'e9n arwa t\'fareo, ar l\'e1 ve parmangolmoltar.\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 24 
\f3\b0 Therefore everyone who hears these words of mine will be like an intelligent man, who built his house on the rock. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  And the rain poured down, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat against that house, but it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock.\
	
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  Furthermore, everyone that hears these words of mine and does not do according to them is like an unintelligent man, who built his house on the sand. 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  And the rain poured down, and the floods came, and the winds blew and struck against that house, and it collapsed, and its fall was great!\'94\
	
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  Now when Jesus finished all these words, the crowds were in wonder at [-
\f1\b nen
\f3\b0 ] his teaching, 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  for he taught them as a person having authority, and not like their scribes.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 8 \

\f2\b0 Ar apa t\'fales undu i orontello hoe \uc0\u351 angar hilyaner se. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9, halmahlaiwa qu\'e9n t\'fale senna ar lantane undu epe se, qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, qui meril, polil poita ni!\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar rahtala m\'e1ryanen se-appanes, qu\'e9tala: \'93Merin! Na poica!\'94 Ar mi imya l\'fa anes poitana halmahl\'edveryallo. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Cena i quetil munta aiquenna, mal mena, \'e1 tana imle i *airimon, ar *yaca i anna ya M\'f3ses canne, ve *vettie tien!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 8\

\f3\b0 And after he came down from the mountain huge throngs followed him. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And look, a leprous person cane to him and fell down before him, saying: \'93Lord, if you wish, you can cleanse me!\'94 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And reaching out with his hand he touched him, saying: \'93I want to! Be clean!\'94 And in the same moment he was cleansed from his leprosy [
\f1\b halmahl\'edve
\f3\b0 , skin-disease]. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  And Jesus said to him: \'93See that you say nothing to anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest, and sacrifice the gift that Moses commanded, as a witness to them!\'94 \

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre lendes mir Capernaum, *tuxantur t\'fale senna, arcala senna 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  ar qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, n\'faronya caita *lalev\'edte i coasse, arwa r\'facime \'f1walmaron!\'94 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar quentes senna: \'93\'cdre tulin, nestuvanyes!\'94 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Mal i *tuxantur hanquente sie: \'93Heru, uan valda i tulil nu t\'f3panya, mal qui rie quetil i quetta, n\'faronya nauva nestana. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  An y\'fa inye n\'e1 n\'e9r panyana nu t\'fare, arwa ohtarion nu ni, ar qui quetin qu\'e9n sinanna: Mena!, t\'e1 m\'e9nas, ar exenna: Tula!, t\'e1 t\'falas, ar n\'faronyanna: Cara si!, t\'e1 carises!\'94\
\
	
\f3\i And when he went into Capernaum, a centurion came to him, petitioning of him 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  and saying: \'93Lord, my servant lies lame in the house, having terrible pains!\'94 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  And he said to him: \'93When I come, I shall heal him!\'94 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  But the centurion answered him: \'93Lord, I am not worthy that you come under my roof, but if you solely say the word, my servant will be healed. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  For I as well am a man put under authority, having soldiers under me, and if I say to this person: Go!, then he is going, and to another: Come!, then he is coming, and to my servant: Do this!, then he does it!\'94\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Hl\'e1rala ta, Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne qu\'e1tina elmendanen ar quente innar hilyaner se: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lenna, taite savie uan ih\'edrie aiquende Israelde. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Mal quetin lenna i tuluvar rimbali R\'f3mello ar N\'famello ar caituvar ara i sarno as Avraham ar \'cdsac ar Y\'e1cov menelo araniesse, 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  lan i arani\'e9no yondor nauvar h\'e1tine mir i mornie i ettesse. Tasse euvar yaiwelta ar mulielta nelciva!\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus quente i *tuxanturenna: \'93Mena! S\'edve as\'e1viel, tambe \'e1 marta lyen!\'94 Ar i n\'faro n\'e1ne nestana yana l\'famesse. \
\
	
\f3\i Hearing that, Jesus was filled with wonder and said to [the ones] that followed him: \'93I truly say to you, such faith I have not found in anyone in Israel. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  But I say to you that numerous ones will come from East and West and will lie at the table with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  while the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the darkness on the outside. There will be their waiting and their grinding of teeth! 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Then Jesus said to the centurion: \'93Go! As you have believed, so let it happen for you!\'94 And the servant was healed in that hour.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus, \'edre t\'fales mir coarya P\'e9ter, cenne veriryo amil caimassea ar hlaiwa \'farenen. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus appane m\'e1rya, ar i \'fare v\'e1ne hello. Ar h\'e9 oronte ar *veuyane sen.\
	
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Mal apa \uc0\u351 inye t\'fale, queni taller senna rimbali i n\'e1ner haryane lo raucor, ar et-hantes i raucor quettanen, ar nestanes illi i perp\'e9raner, 
\f0\b 17 
\f2\b0 carien nanwa ya n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina ter Yesaia i Eruterc\'e1no, qu\'e9tala: \'93S\'e9 nampe hl\'edvelvar ar colde qu\'e1melvar!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 14
\f3\b0  And Jesus, when he came into Peter's house, saw his wife's mother bedridden and sick with a fever. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And Jesus touched her hand, and the fever vanished from her. And she arose and ministered to him.\
	
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  But after evening came, people brought to him many that were possessed by demons, and he threw out the demons with a word, and he healed all that were suffering, 
\f1\b 17 
\f3\b0 making true what was written through Isaiah the Prophet, saying: \'93He took our illnesses and bore our sicknesses!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  \'cdre Y\'e9sus cenne \uc0\u351 anga ya pelde se, cannes i lelyumnelte i hyana f\'e1ranna. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ar parmangolmo t\'fale senna ar quente senna: \'93*Peantar, hilyuvan lye ilya n\'f3menna yanna lelyal!\'94 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Rusqui samir eccar ar menelo aiwi samir *haustar, mal i Atanyondo ua same n\'f3me yasse lertas panya carya!\'94 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  T\'e1 exe mici hildoryar quente senna: \'93Heru, lava nin minyave auta ar tala atarinya sapsaryanna!\'94 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93\'c1ni hilya, ar lava i qualinain tala qualinaltar sapsaltannar!\'94  \
	
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre lendes mir lunte, hildoryar hilyaner se. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9, enge t\'fara amortale i earesse, t\'fapala i lunte i falmainen, mal isse n\'e1ne lorna. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Ar t\'falelte ar eccoitaner se, qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, \'e1me rehta, qu\'e1lalme!\'94 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Mal quentes t\'e9na: \'93Manen n\'e1 i nalde caurie, queni pitya savi\'e9no?\'94 T\'e1, ortala, naityanes i s\'fari ar i ear, ar enge n\'fara quilde. 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Mal i neri n\'e1ner qu\'e1tine elmendanen ar quenter: \'93Mana nostaleo n\'e1 n\'e9r sina, pan y\'fa i s\'fari ar i ear carir ve quetis?\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 18
\f3\b0  When Jesus saw a throng that surrounded him, he commanded that they were to go to the other shore. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  And a scribe came to him and said to him: \'93Teacher, I will follow you to every place that you go!\'94 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  But Jesus said to him: \'93Foxes have holes and the birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of Man does not have a place where he may put his head!\'94 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  Then another among his disciples sayd to him: \'93Lord, let me first go away and bring my father to his grave!\'94 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  Jesus said to him: \'93Follow me, and let the dead bring their dead ones to their graves!\'94\
	
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  And when he went into a boat, his disciples followed him. 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  And look, there was an uprising in the sea, covering the boat with the waves, but he was asleep. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  And they came and woke him up, saying: \'93Lord, save us, we are dying!\'94 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  But he said to them: \'93How is [it] that you are timid, people of little faith?\'94 Then, standing up, he rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a deep silence. 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  But the men were filled with wonder and said: \'93Of what kind is this man, since also the winds and the sea do as he says?\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  \'cdre t\'fales i hyana f\'e1ranna, mir i n\'f3re i Araryaron, n\'e9r atta haryaine lo raucoli vellet se, t\'falala et i noirillon, ita verce. Etta *\'faquen s\'e1me i huore cilien tana malle. 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! y\'e1mette, qu\'e9tala: \'93Mana ment ar lyen, Eruion? Ma ut\'faliel sir nwalien met n\'f3 i l\'fame?\'94 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Mal haira tello enge l\'e1m\'e1re rimbe polcal\'edva nesselesse. 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  I raucor arcaner senna, qu\'e9tala: \'93Qui et-hatil me, \'e1me menta mir i l\'e1m\'e1re polcaiva!\'94 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mena!\'94 Ar apa ettulie lendelte mir i poicar, ar y\'e9! i quanda l\'e1m\'e1re lende rimpa olla i lanca mir i ear, ar quallelte i nenissen. 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Mal i mavari \'fa\uc0\u351 er, ar lelyala mir i osto nyarnelte ilqua, y\'fa pa i raucoharyanar. 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! i quanda osto etelende velien Y\'e9sus, ar apa cenie se, hortaneltes auta m\'e9naltallon.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 28
\f3\b0  When he came to the other shore, into the land of the Gadarenes, two men possessed by demons met him, coming from the graves, extremely fierce. Therefore nobody had the courage to choose that road. 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  And behold! they cried [out], saying: \'93What is to us [dual] and to you, Son of God? Have you come hither to torment us [dual] before the time?\'94 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  But far from them was a herd of many pigs on pasture. 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  The demons asked of him, saying: \'93If you throw us out, send us into the herd of pigs!\'94 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93Go!\'94 And after coming out they went into the pigs, and behold! the entire herd wend rushing over the precipice into the sea, and they died in the waters. 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  But the shepherds [or, herders] fled, and going into the city they told everything, also concerning the demon-possessed ones. 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  And behold! the entire city went out to meet Jesus, and after seeing him, they urged him to go away from their regions.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 9\

\f2\b0 Ar lelyala mir i lunte lahtanes i ear ar lende mir v\'e9ra ostorya. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9, tallelte senna *lalev\'edte n\'e9r caitala caimasse. C\'e9nala savielta Y\'e9sus quente i *lalev\'edtenna: \'93Huore, h\'edna! \'dacaretyar nar aps\'e9nine!\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9, queneli mici i parmangolmor quenter intenna: \'93N\'e9r sina naiqu\'e9ta!\'94 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus, istala sanweltar, quente: \'93Manen n\'e1 i s\'e1nealde olce natali endaldasse? 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  An mana i ambe anc\'e1rima nat quetien: \'dacaretyar nar aps\'e9nine, hya: \'c1 orta ar vanta \'96 ? Mal istieldan in i Atanyondo same t\'fare cemende apsenien \'facari \'96\'94 t\'e1 quentes i *lalev\'edtenna: \'93\'c1 orta, \'e1 mapa caimalya ar mena marelyanna!\'94 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar orontes ar lende maryanna. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  C\'e9nala ta, i \uc0\u351 angar n\'e1ner ruhtaine ar antaner alcar Erun, ye antane taite t\'fare atanin.\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 9\

\f3\b0 And going into the boat he crossed the sea and went into his own city. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And behold, they brought to him a lame man lying on a bed. Seeing their faith Jesus said to the lame one: \'93Courage, child! Your sins are forgiven!\'94 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And behold, some among the scribes said to themselves: \'93This man is blaspheming!\'94 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said: \'93How is [it] that you are thinking wicked things in your heart? 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  For what is the more easy thing to say: Your sins are forgiven, or: Rise and walk \'96 ? But for you to know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins \'96 \'94 then he said to the lame one: \'93Rise, take your bed and go to your home!\'94 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  And he arose and went to his home. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Seeing that, the crowds were terrified and gave glory to God, who gave such power to men.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar autala talo Y\'e9sus cenne n\'e9r h\'e1ra i *tungwemende, estaina Matt\'e9o, ar quentes senna: \'93\'c1ni hilya!\'94 Ar orontes ar hilyane se. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Epeta, \'edre caines ara i sarno i coasse, y\'e9! rimbe *tungwem\'f3li ar \'facarindoli t\'faler ar cainer tasse as Y\'e9sus ar hildoryar. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Mal c\'e9nala ta, i Farisar qu\'e9taner hildoryannar: \'93Manen n\'e1 i *peantarelda mate as *tungwem\'f3li ar \'facarindoli?\'94 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Hl\'e1rala sa quentes: \'93Queni m\'e1lesse uar same maure a\uc0\u351 arova, mal i nimpar. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Mena ar para ya si tea: Merin \'f3ravie ar l\'e1 *yacie. An t\'falen yalien, l\'e1 failar, mal \'facarindor!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 9
\f3\b0  And going away from there Jesus saw a man sit at the tax office, called Matthew, and he said to him: \'93Follow me!\'94 And he arose and followed him. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Thereafter, when he lay by the table in the house, behold! many tax collectors and sinners came and lay there with Jesus and his disciples. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  But seeing that, the Pharisees were saying to his disciples: \'93How is [it] that your teacher eats with the tax collectors and sinners? 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  Hearing it he said: \'93People in health do not have [any] need of a healer, but the ailing ones [do]. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Go and learn what this means: I want mercy and not sacrifice. For I came to call, not righteous ones, but sinners!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Yoh\'e1no i *Sumbando hildor t\'faler senna ar maquenter: \'93Manen n\'e1 i elme ar i Farisar hepir lamati, mal hildolyar uar hepe lamati?\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93I endero meldor lau polir same naire \'edre i ender ea aselte? Mal r\'ed tuluvar \'edre i ender nauva mapana oa tello, ar t\'e1 hepuvalte lamati. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  *\'daquen tace *lilma *alapihta lanneo y\'e1ra collasse, an quanta t\'farerya tucuva sallo, ar euva ambe faica narcie. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Ente, *\'faquen panya vinya limpe y\'e1re *helmolpessen, mal qui mo \'e9 care sie, i *helmolpi nar *r\'favine ar i limpe ulya ettenna ar i *helmolpi nar nancarne. Mal queni panyar vinya limpe vinye *helmolpessen, ar y\'fayo lemyat!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 14
\f3\b0  Then John the Baptist's disciples came to him and asked: \'93How is [it] that we and the Pharisees keep fasts, but your disciples do not keep fasts?\'94 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And Jesus said to them: \'93The friends of the bridegroom surely cannot have grief while the bridegroom is with them? But days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will keep fasts. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  No one fastens a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old cloak, for its full power will pull from it, and there will be a worse tearing. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  Furthermore, no one puts new wine in old skin-bottles, but if one does do so, the skin-bottles are ruptured and the wine pours out and the skin-bottles are destroyed. But people put new wine in new skin-bottles, and both remain!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  \'cdre nyarnes t\'e9na nati sine, y\'e9! tur t\'fale hare ar luhtane senna, qu\'e9tala: \'93Selyenya *\uc0\u351 intan\'e9ya qualle, mal tula ar \'e1 panya m\'e1lya sesse, ar nanwenuvas coivienna!\'94\
	
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus oronte ar se-hilyane, as hildoryar. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! n\'eds arwa celumeo serceva ter loar yunque t\'fale ca se ar appane collaryo lane, 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  an quentes insenna: \'93Qui eryave appan collarya nauvan rehtana!\'94 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quernexe ar, tuntala se, quente: \'93Huore, selye! Savielya erehtie lye!\'94 Ar yana l\'famello i n\'eds s\'e1me m\'e1le.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 18
\f0\i0  
\f3\i\b0 While he told them these things, behold! a ruler came near and bowed to him, saying: \'93My daughter died a little while ago, but come and put your hand on her, and she will return to life!\'94\
	
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Then Jesus arose and followed him, with his disciples. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  And behold! a woman having a flood of blood for [
\f1\b ter
\f3\b0 , through] twelve years came behind him and touched the rim of his cloak, 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  for she said to herself: \'93If only I touch his cloak I shall be saved!\'94 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  Jesus turned and, noticing her, said: \'93Courage, daughter! Your faith has saved you!\'94 And from that time the woman had health.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  \'cdre t\'fales coanna i turwa ar cenne i simpetari ar i \uc0\u351 anga c\'e1rala yalme, 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quente: \'93\'c1 auta silo, an i vende ua qualle, mal n\'e1se lorna!\'94 T\'e1 lalanelte senna yaiwenen. 
\f0\b 25 
\f2\b0 Apa mentave i \uc0\u351 anga ettenna lendes minna ar nampe m\'e1rya, ar i vende oronte. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Ar nyarna sina ett\'fale quanda sana m\'e9nanna.\
	
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  \'cdre Y\'e9sus lahtane talo, lacen\'edte n\'e9r atta hilyanet se, y\'e1mala ar qu\'e9tala: \'93\'d3rava metse, Lavirion!\'94 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Apa menie mir i coa, i lacen\'edti t\'faler senna, ar Y\'e9sus quente senna. \'93Ma saviste i polin care si?\'94 Hanquentette senna: \'93N\'e1, Heru!\'94 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  T\'e1 appanes henduttat, qu\'e9tala: \'93Nai martuva lent ve saviste!\'94 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Ar henduttat camnet *c\'e9ne. Ente, Y\'e9sus tulcave canne tun, qu\'e9tala: \'93Cena in *\'faquen ista sa!\'94 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Mal t\'fa, \'edre lendette ettenna, nyarne pa se mi quanda sana m\'e9na.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 23
\f3\b0  When he came to the house of the ruler and saw the flute-players and the crowd making clamour, 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  Jesus said: \'93Go away from here, for the maiden did not die, but she is asleep. Then they laughed at him with scorn. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  After sending the crowd outside he went inside and took her hand, and the maiden arose. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  And this story went out to that entire region. \
	
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  When Jesus passed along from there, two blind men followed him, crying and saying: \'93Have mercy on us, Son of David!\'94  
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  After going into the house, the sightless ones came to him, and Jesus said to them: \'93Do you believe that I can do this?\'94 They answered him: \'93Yes, Lord!\'94 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  Then he touched their eyes, saying: \'93May it happen to you as you believe!\'94 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  And their eyes received sight. Furthermore, Jesus firmly commanded them, saying: \'93See that no one knows it!\'94 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  But they, when they went outside, told about him to in that entire region.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  S\'ed \'edre oantelte, y\'e9! queni taller senna \'fapa n\'e9r haryaina lo rauco, 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  ar apa i rauco n\'e1ne et-h\'e1tina, i \'fapa n\'e9r carampe. I \uc0\u351 angar n\'e1ner qu\'e1tine elmendanen ar quenter: \'93Nat ve si ua oi anaie c\'e9nina Israelde!\'94 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  Mal i Farisar quenter: \'93I raucoron herunen et-hatis i raucor!\'94\
	
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus lende rindesse ilye i ostonnar ar mastonnar, peantala *yomencoaltassen ar c\'e1rala sinwa i evandilyon i arani\'e9no ar nestala ilya nostale hl\'edveo ar ilya nostale nimpi\'e9no. 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  \'cdre cennes i \uc0\u351 angar, endarya etelende t\'e9na,  an anelte helde ar vintane ve m\'e1mar \'fa mavaro. 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  T\'e1 quentes hildoryannar: \'93I y\'e1vie hoa n\'e1, mal i molir nar mance. Etta arca i yavi\'e9no Herunna i mentauvas *molindor y\'e1vieryanna!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 32
\f3\b0  Now, when he went away, behold! people brought him a dumb man possessed by a demon, 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  and after the demon was thrown out, the dumb man spoke. The crowds were filled with wonder and said: \'93A thing like this has not ever been seen in Israel!\'94 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  But the Pharisees said: \'93By the lord of the demons he throws out the demons!\'94\
	
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  And Jesus went in a circuit to all the cities and villages, instructing in their synagogues and making known the gospel of the kingdom and healing every kind of sickness and every kind of ailment. 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  When he saw the crowds, his heart went out to them, for they were naked and scattered like sheep without a shepherd. 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  Then he said to his disciples: \'93The harvest is great, but [those] who work are few. Therefore ask of the Lord of the harvest that he will send workers to his harvest!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 10\

\f2\b0 Ar tultanes i hildor yunque ar antane tien t\'fare or \'fapoice fairi, et-hatieltan te, ar nestieltan ilya hl\'edve ar ilya nimpa s\'f3ma.\
	
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Essi i hildoron yunque nar sine: Minyave S\'edmon ye n\'e1 estaina P\'e9ter, ar Andr\'e9as h\'e1norya, ar Y\'e1cov yondorya Severai, ar Yohannes h\'e1norya, 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Filip ar Var\uc0\u351 olom\'e9o, Tomas ar Matt\'e9o i *tungwemo, Y\'e1cov yondorya Alf\'e9o ar \u350 and\'e9o, 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  S\'edmon i Can\'e1anya ar Y\'faras Iscariot, ye apa antane se olla.\
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Yunque sine Y\'e9sus etementane, antala tien canwar sine: \'93\'c1va mene i mallesse i n\'f3rennar, ar \'e1va tule mir Sam\'e1rea osto. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  I mende mena i vanwe m\'e1mannar Isra\'e9lo coallo! 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Lan lelyalde, \'e1 cara sinwa i menta, qu\'e9tala: 'Menelo aranie ut\'falie hare.' 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  \'c1 nesta hlaiwar, \'e1 orta qualinar, \'e1 poita halmahlaiwar, et-hata raucor! Ac\'e1mielde muntan, \'e1 anta muntan! 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  \'c1va panya malta hya telpe hya urus quiltaldasse 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  hya tala mattapoco i lendan, hya laupe atta, hya hyapat hya vandil, an ye mole n\'e1 valda mattaryo.\

\f3\i \

\f1\b CHAPTER 10  \

\f3\b0 And he summoned the twelve disciples and gave to them power over unclean spirits, for them to throw them out, and for them to heal every disease and every ailing condition.\
	
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  [The] names of the twelve disciples are these: First Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, and Jacob the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the tax collector, Jacob the brother of Alpheus and Thaddeus, 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  Simon the Cananean and Judas Iscariot, who after gave him over.\
	
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  These twelve Jesus sent forth, giving them these commands: \'93Do not go on the road to the [gentile] nations, and do not come into a Samaritan city. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  Instead [
\f1\b i mende
\f3\b0  'in the place'] go to the lost sheep from the house of Israel! 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  While you go, make known the message, saying: 'The kingdom of heaven has come near.' Heal sick ones, raise dead ones, cleanse skin-diseased ones, throw out demons! You have received [it] for nothing, give [it] for nothing! 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Do not put gold or silver or copper in your belt 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  or bring a food-pouch for the journey, or two tunics, or shoes or a staff, for [the one] who works is worthy of his food.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ilya ostosse hya mastosse mir ya tulilde, ce\uc0\u351 a man sasse valda n\'e1, ar \'e1 lemya tasse tenna autalde. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  \'cdre tulilde mir i coa, \'e1sa *suila, 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  ar qui i coa valda n\'e1, nai i raine ya merilde san tuluva sanna, mal qui uas valda, nai i raine lello nanwenuva lenna. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Quiquie aiquen ua came le hya lasta quettaldannar, \'edre autalde sana coallo hya sana ostollo, \'e1 pale i asto taluldalto. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna: I Aure Nami\'e9va nauva ambe *c\'f3lima Soromo n\'f3ren epe sana oston!\
\
	
\f3\i In every city or village into which you come, find out who in it is worthy, and remain there until you go away. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  When you come into the house, greet it, 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  and if the house is worthy, may the peace that you wish for it come upon it, but if it is not worthy, may the peace from you return to you. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  Whenever anyone does not receive you or listens to your words, when you go away form that house or from that city, shake the dust from your feet [dual]. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you: The Day of Judgement will be more bearable for the land of Sodom than for that city!\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Y\'e9! Mentan le ve m\'e1mar mici \'f1armor. Etta na hande ve leucar ar *c\'e1mal\'f3re ve cucuar. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Tira inde atannar, an antauvalte le olla *n\'e1mocombin ar le-riptuvalte *yomencoaltassen. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Nauvalde tulyane epe n\'f3rec\'e1nor ar arani pa inye, ve *vettie tien ar i n\'f3rin. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Mal \'edre antalte le olla, \'e1va na *tarastaine pa manen hya mana quetuvalde, an ya quetuvalde nauva len antana l\'fame entasse. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  An i quetir uar rie l\'e9, mal Atareldo Faire ye quete l\'e9nen. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Ente, h\'e1no antauva olla h\'e1no qualmenna, ar atar h\'ednarya, ar h\'edni ortuvar ontarultanta ar tyaruvar qualmetta. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Ar elde nauva t\'e9vine lo illi pa essenya, mal ye perpere i mettanna, isse nauva rehtana. 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  \'cdre roitalte le osto sinasse, u\uc0\u351 a hyananna, an n\'e1sie quetin lenna: Laume telyuvalde i rinde ostoron Isra\'e9lo n\'f3 i Atanyondo tuluva.\

\f0\b \

\f2\b0 	
\f1\i\b 16
\f3\b0  Behold! I send you like sheep among wolves. Therefore be intelligent like serpents and guiltless like doves. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Watch yourselves against men, for they will give you over to tribunals and will flay you in their synagogues. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  You will be led before governors and kings concernin me, as a witness to them and to the nations. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  But when they give you over, do not be troubled about how or what you are to say, for [that] which you are to say will be given to you in that hour. 
\f1\b 20 
\f3\b0 For [the ones] that speak are not only you, but your Father's Spirit that speaks by you. 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  Furthermore, brother will give brother over to death, and a father his child, and children will rise against their parents [dual] and will cause their [dual] death. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  And you will be hated by all concerning my name, but who endures to the end, he will he saved. 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  When they pursue you in this city, flee to another, for truly I say to you: By no means will you complete the circuit of the cities of Israel before the Son of Man shall come.\

\f0\i0\b \

\f2\b0 	
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Hildo ua or ye peanta se, hya m\'f3l or herurya. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Farya i hildon qui olis ve ye peanta se, ar i m\'f3l ve herurya. Qui queni estaner i *coantur V\'e9lsevul, manen ita ambe estuvalte i queni coaryo sie? \
\
	
\f1\i\b 24
\f0\i0  
\f3\i\b0 A disciple is not above [the one] who instructs him, or a slave above his lord. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  It suffices for the disciple if he becomes like [the one] who instructs him, and the slave like his lord. If people called the householder Beelzebul, how much more will they call the people of his house so?\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Etta \'e1va ruce tello. An ea munta t\'f3pina ya ua nauva apantana, ar munta nulda ya ua nauva sinwa. 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Ya nyarin len i morniesse, queta i calasse, ar ya hlarilde hlussaina, \'e1sa care sinwa ingallon i coaron. 
\f0\b 28 
\f2\b0 Ar \'e1va ruce illon nahtar i hroa mal uar pole nahta i fea; ambe rongo ruca yello pole nancare fea ar hroa v\'e9la Ehennasse. 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Ma uat filit atta v\'e1cine mittan urusteva? Ananta er mici t\'fa ua lanta i talamenna pen Atareldo istya. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Mal yando ilye i findi careldasse nar n\'f3tine. 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Etta \'e1va ruce; nalde mirwe epe rimbe filici.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 26
\f3\b0  Therefore do not fear them. For there is nothing covered that will not be revealed, and nothing secret that will not be known. 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  [That] which I tell you in the darkness, say in the light, and [that] which you hear being whispered, make it known from the tops of the houses. 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  And not do fear [those] those that kills the body but cannot kill the soul; sooner [or, rather] fear [the one] that can undo soul and body alike in Gehenna. 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  But are not two sparrows sold for a piece of copper? And yet one among them [dual] does not fall to the ground without your Father's knowledge. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  But also [or, even] all the hairs on your head are counted. 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  Therefore do not fear; you are more precious than many sparrows. \

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Etta ilquen ye *etequeta ni epe atani, y\'fa inye *etequetuva epe Atarinya ye ea menelde; 
\f0\b 33 
\f2\b0 mal aiquen ye l\'e1quete ni epe atani, y\'fa inye laquetuva epe Atarinya ye ea menelde. 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  \'c1va sana i ut\'falien panien raine cemende; uan t\'fale panien raine, mal macil. 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  An t\'falen tyarien \uc0\u351 ancier: n\'e9r ataryanna, ar selye amilleryanna, ar nessa veri i amillenna veruryo; 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  ar atano \'f1ottor nar i queni coaryasse. 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  Qui queno atar hya amil n\'e1 sen melda epe ni, uas valda nin; ar qui queno yondo hya selye n\'e1 sen melda epe ni, uas valda nin. 
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  Ar aiquen ye ua mapa tarwerya ar hilya ni ua valda nin. 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  Ye hire cuilerya, sen nauvas vanwa, mal i qu\'e9n yeo cuile ole vanwa m\'e1rienyan, hiruva sa. \
\
\pard\pardeftab709\sa120\partightenfactor0
\cf0 	
\f1\i\b 32
\f3\b0  Therefore everyone that confesses me before men, I as well will confess before my father who is in heaven; 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  but anyone that denies me before men, I as well will deny before my Father who is in heaven. 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  Do not think that I have come to put peace on earth; I have not come to put peace [here], but a sword. 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  For I came to cause splits: a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a young wife against the mother of her husband; 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  and a man's enemies are the people of his house. 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  If a person's father or mother is dearer to him than I [am], he is not worthy of me; and if a person's son or daughter is dearer to him than me, he is not worthy of me. 
\f1\b 38
\f3\b0  And anyone that does not take his cross and follows me is not worthy of me. 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  [The] one that finds his life, to him it shall be lost, but the person whose life becomes lost for my sake [lit. for my good], will find it.\
\pard\pardeftab709\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 \
	
\f0\b 40
\f2\b0  Ye came l\'e9 came y\'fa ni, ar ye came ni came y\'fa ye ni-mentane. 
\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  Ye came Eruterc\'e1no pan n\'e1se Eruterc\'e1no, camuva Eruterc\'e1no *paityale, ar ye came faila n\'e9r pan n\'e1se faila, camuva faila nero *paityale. 
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  Ar aiquen ye anta quenen mici pityar sine rie yulma ringa neno pan n\'e1se hildo \'96 n\'e1sie quetin lenna, *paityalerya laume nauva vanwa sen. \
\
	
\f1\i\b 40
\f3\b0  [He] that receives you receives also me, and [he] that receives me receives also the one who sent me. 
\f1\b 41
\f3\b0  [The one] that receives a prophet since he is a prophet, will receive a prophet's reward, and [the one] that receives a just man since he is just, will receive a just man's reward. 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  And anyone that gives to a person among these small ones only a cup of cold water since he is a disciple \'96 truly I say to you, his reward will by no means be lost to him.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 11 \

\f2\b0 Apa Y\'e9sus telyane cane hildoryain yunque, etementanes te talo, peantien ar carien i menta sinwa ostoltassen. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Mal Yoh\'e1no, hl\'e1rala pa se mandosse, mentane v\'e9re hildoryainen 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  ar quente senna: \'93Ma elye n\'e1 ye tulumne, hya h\'f3palme exen?\'94 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93\'c1 auta ar nyara Yoh\'e1non yar hl\'e1ralde ar yar c\'e9nalde: 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  I lacen\'edti cenir ata, ar i *lalev\'edti vantar, i halmahlaiwar nar poitaine ar i *hl\'e1rel\'f3rar hl\'e1rar, ar i qualinar nar ortaine, ar i penyar hl\'e1rar i evandilyon carna sinwa, 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  ar valima n\'e1 ye inyesse hire munta qu\'e9rala se oa.\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 11\

\f3\b0 After Jesus finished commanding his twelve disciples, he sent them forth from there, to teach and to make the message known in their cities. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  But John, hearing about him in prison, sent [a message] by his own disciples 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  and said to him: \'93Are you [the one] who is going to come, or are we waiting for another?\'94 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said to them: \'93Go away and tell John [the things] that you are hearing and that you are seeing: 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  The blind see again, and the lame walk, the leprous [lit. skin-diseased] are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, and the dead are being raised, and the poor ones are hearing the gospel made known, 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  and happy is the one that in me finds nothing turning him away.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 7 
\f2\b0 \'cdre t\'e9 oanter, Y\'e9sus *yestane carpa i \uc0\u351 anganna pa Yoh\'e1no: \'93Mana etelendelde mir i erume cenien? Lisce l\'e9vala i s\'farinen? 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  L\'e1, mana etelendelde cenien? N\'e9r arwa mussi lannaron? Y\'e9, i arwar mussi lannaron ear coassen araniva! 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Mal mana castanen etelendelde? Cenie Eruterc\'e1no? N\'e1, quetin lenna, ar ambela Eruterc\'e1no! 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Isse n\'e1 i qu\'e9n pa ye n\'e1 t\'e9cina: 'Y\'e9, inye menta terc\'e1nonya epe lye, manwien mallelya epe lye.' 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna: Mici i nar n\'f3ne lo nissi, *\'faquen n\'e1 t\'fara epe Yoh\'e1no i *Sumbando, mal i ampitya menelo araniesse n\'e1 t\'fara epe s\'e9. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Mal ho r\'e9ryar Yoh\'e1no i *Sumbando tenna s\'ed, menelo aranie perpere orme, ar i carir orme mapar sa. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  An ilye i Eruterc\'e1nor ar i \uc0\u350 anye quenter apaceniltar tenna Yoh\'e1no, 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  ar qui merilde came sa, n\'e1se El\'eda ye tulumne. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ye same hlaru, nai hlaruvas!\
\
	
\f1\i\b 7
\f3\b0  When they went away, Jesus began to speak to the crowd concerning John: \'93What did you go forth into the desert to see? A sedge moving by the wind? 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  No, what did you go forth to see? A man having soft clothes? Behold, those that have soft clothes are in the houses of kings! 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  But for what reason did you go forth? Seeing a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and far more than a prophet! 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  He is the person of whom [it] is written: \'93Behold, I send my herald in front of you, in order to prepare your way before you. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you: Among [those] that are born by women, no one is greater than John the Baptist, but the smallest in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  But from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and those that do violence seize it. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  For all the prophets and the Law spoke their prophecies until John, 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  and if you wish to receive it, he is Elijah that was going to come. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  [He] who has ears, may he hear!\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  As mana sestuvan *n\'f3nare sina? Nalte ve h\'edni h\'e1mala i mancan\'f3messen, y\'e1mala i hyane h\'ednannar: 'Tyaldelme i simpe len, mal ualde liltane; anelme yaimie, mal ualde pente inde nairesse.' 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  An Yoh\'e1no t\'fale pen matie hya sucie, ar queni quetir: 'N\'e1se haryana lo rauco!'  
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  I Atanyondo t\'fale matila ar sucila, ar queni quetir: 'Ela! N\'e9r antana lapten ar sucien limpe, meldo *tungwemoron ar \'facarindoron!' Ananta Sailie anaie tanana faila cardaryainen!\'94 \
	
\f0\b 20 
\f2\b0 T\'e1 *yestanes naitya i ostor yasse i amarimbar t\'farie cardaryaron martaner, pan loitanelte hire inwis: \'93Horro lyen, Corasin! Horro lyen, Vet-Saira! An au i t\'farie cardar yar amartier letse martaner mi T\'edr hya S\'edron, andan\'e9ya cestanelte inwis mi findilanne ar *litte! 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Etta quetin lenna: T\'edren ar S\'edronen i Aure Nami\'e9va nauva *c\'f3lima epe ya nauvas lent! 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Ar elye, Capernaum, ma nauval ortana menelenna? Undu Mandostonna tuluval, an au i t\'farie cardar yar martaner lyesse martaner Soromesse, tana osto tarne tenna aure sina. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Etta quetin lenna: Soromo n\'f3ren i Aure Nami\'e9va nauva c\'f3lima epe ya nauvas len!\'94     \
\
	
\f1\i\b 16
\f3\b0  With what am I to compare this generation? They are like children sitting in the market places [
\f1\b mancan\'f3me
\f3\b0  = trade-place], crying to the other children: 'We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we were wailing, but you did not beat yourselves in grief.' 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  For John came without eating or drinking, and people say: 'He is possessed by a demon!' 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  The Son of Men came eating and drinking, and people say: 'Look! A man given to gluttony and to drinking wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!' And yet Wisdom has been made shown righteous by its deeds!\'94\
	
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  Then he began to rebuke [
\f1\b naitya
\f3\b0  = put to shame] the cities where his most numerous of his mighty deeds happened, since they failed to find repentance: \'93Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty deeds that have happened in you [dual] happened in Tyre or Sidon, long ago they [would have] sought repentance in sackcloth [
\f1\b findilanne
\f3\b0  = hair-cloth] and ash! 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  Therefore I say to you: To Tyre and Sidon the Day of Judgement will be more bearable than it will be for you [dual]. [Literally: ... will be bearable before (that) which it will be for you.] 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  And you, Capernaum, will you be raised to heaven? Down to Mandos [Greek: Hades] you will come, for if the mighty deeds that happened in you [had] happened in Sodom, that city [would have] stood until this day. 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  Therefore I say to you: To the land of Sodom the day of Judgment will be more bearable than it will be for you!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Yana l\'famesse Y\'e9sus ortane \'f3marya ar quente: \'93Laitan tye, \'c1tar, Heru or menel cemenye, pan unurtiel nati sine i sailallon ar handallon ar \'e1pantie tai vinimoin! 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  N\'e1, \'c1tar, an carie sie n\'e1ne ya fastane tye! 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Ilye nati nar nin antane lo Atarinya, ar *\'faquen aqua ista i Yondo hequa i Atar; ente, *\'faquen aqua ista i Atar hequa i Yondo ar aiquen yen i Yondo mere apanta se. 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Tula ninna, illi i m\'f3tar ar colir lunge c\'f3lar, ar antauvan lyen s\'e9re! 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  \'c1 panya yaltanya indesse ar para nillo, an nanye moica ar nalda endasse, ar hiruvalde s\'e9re fealdain. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  An yaltanya malda n\'e1, ar c\'f3lanya *alalunga!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 25
\f3\b0  At that time Jesus rose his voice and said: \'93I praise you, Father, Lord over heaven and earth, since you have hid these things from the wise and intelligent, and has revealed them to babes! 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  Yes, Father, for doing so was what pleased you! 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  All things are given to me by my Father, and no one wholly knows the Son except the Father; furthermore, no one wholly knows the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son wishes to reveal him. 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  Come to me, all that toil and carry heavy burdens, and I will give you rest! 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  Put my yoke on yourselves and learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  For my yoke is gentle, and my burden light.\
\

\f0\i0\b RANTA 12\

\f2\b0 L\'fame yanasse Y\'e9sus lende ter i orirestar i *sendaresse. Hildoryar n\'e1ner maite ar *yestaner lepta i cari oriva matien. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar c\'e9nala si i Farisar quenter senna: \'93Ela! Hildolyar carir ya ua l\'e1vina care i sendaresse!\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Ma ualde ehentanie pa ya Lavir carne \'edre isse ar i neri \'f3se n\'e1ner maite? 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Lendes mir i coa Eruva ar mantelte i massar tani\'e9va, yar \'faner l\'e1vina matta sen hya i n\'e1ner \'f3se, mal rie i *airimoin 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Hya ualde ehentanie i \uc0\u350 anyesse i mi sendare i *airimor i cordasse racir i sendare ananta nar pen c\'e1ma? 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Mal quetin lenna i sisse ea ya n\'e1 t\'fara epe i corda. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Mal qui hanyanelde ya quetta sina tea: 'Merin \'f3ravie, ar l\'e1 *yanca,' ualde namne i nar pen c\'e1ma. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  An i Atanyondo n\'e1 Heru i *sendareo!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 12 \

\f3\b0 At that time Jesus went through the corn-fields on the day of rest. His disciples were hungry and started to pick heads or grain to eat. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And seeing this the Pharisees said to him: \'93Behold! Your disiciples do what is not alloewd to do on the day of rest!\'94 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93Have you not read about what David did when he and the men with him were hungry. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  He went into God's house and ate the breads of showing, which were not allowed food for him or for those that were with him, but for the priests alone? 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Or have you not read in the Law that on the day of rest the priests in the temple break the sabbath and yet are without guilt? 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  But I say to you that here is [that] which is greater than the temple. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  But if you understood what this word means: 'I want mercy, and not sacrifice', you did not judge [or, would not judge] those that are without guilt. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  For the Son of Man is Lord of the day of rest!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Apa oantes talo t\'fales mir *yomencoalta. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! enge tasse n\'e9r arwa hessa m\'e1o. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Man n\'e1 i n\'e9r mici te arwa erya m\'e1mo ye ua, qui m\'e1ma sina lanta mir unque i *sendaresse, se-mapuva ar se-ortuva ettenna? 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Mal manen ambe mirwa epe m\'e1ma n\'e1 atan! Sie n\'e1 l\'e1vina care m\'e1rie i *sendaresse!\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  T\'e1 quentes i nerenna: \'93\'c1 rahta m\'e1lyanen!\'94 Ar rahtanes sanen, ar anes envinyanta ar n\'e1ne ve i hyana m\'e1. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Mal i Farisar lender ettenna ar carner panoli pa manen nancarumneltes. \
\
	
\f1\i\b 9
\f3\b0  After he went away from there he came into their synagogue. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And behold! [there] was there a man having a withered hand. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93Who is the man among you having a single sheep who does not, if this sheep falls into a hollow on the day of rest, take hold of it and lift it out? 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  But how [much] more precious than a sheep is a man! Thus [it] is allowed to do good on the day of rest!\'94 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  Then he said to the man: \'93Reach out with your hand!\'94 And he reached out with it, and it was renewed and was like the other hand. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  But the Pharisees went outside and made plans about how they were going to destroy him.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Istala ta, Y\'e9sus oante talo. Rimbali y\'fa hilyaner se, ar nestanes illi mici te, 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  mal cannes te tulcave i \'e1valte carumne se sinwa, 
\f0\b 17 
\f2\b0 carien anwa ya n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina ter Yesaia i *Eruterc\'e1no, ye quente: \
	
\f0\b 18 
\f2\b0 \'93Y\'e9! N\'faronya ye ilc\'edlien, meldanya, pa ye feanya n\'e1 fastana. Panyuvan fairenya sesse, ar anan caruvas sinwa i n\'f3rennar. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Uas costuva hya yamuva, ar *\'faquen hlaruva \'f3marya i mallessen. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  R\'e1cina lisce uas ascatuva, ar *y\'falala *urulanya uas *luhtyuva, tenna taluvas anan apairenna. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Ar esseryasse i n\'f3ri panyuvar estelelta!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 15
\f3\b0  Knowing that, Jesus went away from there. Numerous ones also followed him, and he healed all among them, 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  but he commanded them firmly that they were not to make him known, 
\f1\b 17 
\f3\b0 to fulfill [lit. make true] which was said through Isaiah the Prophet, who said: \
	
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  \'93Behold! My servant whom I have chosen, my beloved one, by whom my soul is pleased. I shall put my spirit in him, and justice [or, judgement] he will make known to the nations. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  He shall not quarrel or cry, and no one will hear his voice on the roads. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  A broken sedge he shall not crush, and a smouldering wick [
\f1\b urulanya 
\f3\b0 = fire-thread] he shall not extinguish, until he brings justice to victory. 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  And in his name the nations shall put their hope!\'94\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  T\'e1 tallelte senna raucoharyaina n\'e9r, lacen\'edte ar \'fapa, ar nestanes se, ty\'e1rala i \'fapa n\'e9r carpa ar cene. 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Ar ilye i \uc0\u351 angar n\'e1ner ara inte elmendanen, ar quentelte: \'93C\'e9 n\'e9r sina n\'e1 i Lavirion!\'94 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Hl\'e1rala ta, i Farisar quenter: \'93N\'e9r sina ua et-hate i raucor hequa herunen i raucoron, V\'e9lsevuv!\'94 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Istala sanweltar, quentes t\'e9na: \'93Ilya aranie \uc0\u351 anca insanna n\'e1 carna lusta, ar ilya osto ar coa \u351 anca insanna ua taruva. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Ar qui S\'e1tan et-hate S\'e1tan, n\'e1se \uc0\u351 anca insenna; t\'e1 manen aranierya taruva? 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Ente, qui inye et-hate i raucor V\'e9lsevuvnen, mannen yondoldar et-hatir te? Etta t\'e9 nauvar n\'e1moldar. 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Mal qui Eruo fairenen inye et-hate i raucor, Eruo aranie \'e9 ut\'falie lenna. 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Hya manen aiquen pole lelya mir i coa polda nerwa ar mapa armaryar, qui uas minyave nute i polda n\'e9r? Ar t\'e1 piluvas i nati coaryasse. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Ye ua asinye \'f1ottonya n\'e1, ar ye ua comya asinye, vinta. \
\
	
\f1\i\b 22
\f3\b0  Then they brought to him a demon-possessed person, blind and dumb, and he healed him, causing the dumb man to talk and see. 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  And all the crowd were beside themselves with wonder, and they said: \'93Maybe this man is the Son of David!\'94 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  Hearing that, the Pharisees said: \'93This man does not throw out the demons except by the lord of the demons, Beelzebub!\'94 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  Knowing their thoughts, he said to them: \'93Every kingdom split against itself is made void, and every city and house split against itself will not stand. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  And if Satan throws out Satan, he is split against himself; then how will his kingdom stand? 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  Furthermore, if I throw out the demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons throw them out? Therefore they will be your judges. 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  But if [it is] by God's spirit I throw out the demons, God's kingdom has indeed come to you. 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  Or how can anyone go into the house of a strong man and take his goods, if he does not firstly bind the strong man? And then he will steal the things in his house. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  [The one] who is not with me is my enemy, ar [the one] who does not gather with me, scatters.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Etta quetin lenna: Ilya \'facare ar naiquetie nauva aps\'e9nina Atanin, mal naiquetie i Fairenna ua nauva aps\'e9nina. 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  An aiquen ye quete quetta i Atanyondonna, sen nauvas aps\'e9nina, mal ye quete i Airefeanna, ta ua nauva aps\'e9nina sen, mi randa sina ar i tulila v\'e9la. \
	
\f0\b 33 
\f2\b0 Cara i alda m\'e1ra ar y\'e1verya m\'e1ra, hya cara i alda quelexa ar y\'e1verya quelexa; an y\'e1veryanen i alda sinwa n\'e1.\
	
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  Onnar leucoron, manen polilde quete m\'e1re nati, elde i nar ulce? An et i endo \'favello i anto quete. 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  I m\'e1ra atan tala m\'e1re nati m\'e1ra harmaryallo, mal i olca n\'e9r tala olce nati olca harmaryallo. 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  Quetin lyenna i pa ilya quetie ya atani quetir ya ua a\uc0\u351 ea, hanquetuvalte Auresse Nami\'e9va, 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  an v\'e9re quettalyainen nauval n\'e1mina faila, ar v\'e9re quettalyainen nauval n\'e1mina ulca!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 31
\f3\b0  Therefore I say to you: Every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven to Men, but blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven. 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  For anyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man, to him it will be forgiven, but [as for the one] who speaks against the Holy spirit, that will not be forgiven him, in this age and the coming one alike.\
	
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  Make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree rotten and its fruit rotten; for by its fruit the tree is known.\
	
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  Offspring of snakes, how can you say good things, you who are evil? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  The good man brings good things from his good treasure, but the bad [
\f1\b olca
\f3\b0 , wicked] man brings wicked things from his bad treasure. 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  I say to you that concerning every saying that men say that is not beneficial, they will answer on the Day of Judgement, 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  for by your own words you will be judged [to be] righteous, and by your own words you will be judged evil!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  T\'e1 queneli mici Farisar hanquenter senna: \'93*Peantar, merilme cene tanwa lyello!\'94 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse quentes t\'e9na: \'93Olca ar \'favoronda *n\'f3nare cestea tanwa, mal tanwa ua nauva antana san, hequa Y\'f3na i Eruterc\'e1no tanwa. 
\f0\b 40
\f2\b0  An tambe Y\'f3na n\'e1ne i hoa lingwio mityasse auressen nelde ar l\'f3missen nelde, s\'edve i Atanyondo euva cemeno endasse auressen nelde ar l\'f3missen nelde. 
\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  Neri Ninivello ortuvar i namiesse as *n\'f3nare sina ar namuvar sa ulca, an t\'e9 hirner inwis \'edre Y\'f3na carne mentarya sinwa, mal ye! sisse ea ya n\'e1 t\'fara l\'e1 Y\'f3na.\
	
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  Hyarmeno t\'e1ri ortuva i namiesse as *n\'f3nare sina ar namuva sa ulca, an t\'fales cemeno mettallon hlarien Solomondo sailie, ar y\'e9! sisse ea ya n\'e1 t\'fara l\'e1 Solomon.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 38
\f3\b0  Then some among [the] Pharisees answered him: \'93Teacher, we wish to see a sign from you!\'94 
\f1\b 39 
\f3\b0 In answer he said to them: \'93A wicked and unfaithful generation is seeking a sign, but a sign will not be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the Prophet. 
\f1\b 40
\f3\b0  For like Jonah was in the inward part [
\f1\b mitya
\f3\b0 , interior] of the big fish for three days and three nights, so the Son of Man will be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights. 
\f1\b 41
\f3\b0  Men from Ninive will arise in the judgement with this generation and will judge it evil, for they found repentance when Jonah made his message known, but behold! here is what is greater than Jonah! \
	
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  The queen of the South will rise in the judgment with this generation and will judge it evil, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold! here is what is greater than Solomon. \
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 43
\f2\b0  \'cdre \'fapoica faire ettule nerello, lahtas ter parce n\'f3mi cestala n\'f3me s\'e9reva, mal uas hire. 
\f0\b 44
\f2\b0  T\'e1 quetis: \'93Nanwenuvan coanyanna yallo l\'e9ven\'94, ar t\'falala sanna, hiris i coa lusta, mal poica ar netyana. 
\f0\b 45
\f2\b0  T\'e1 lelyas oa ar tala as inse hyane fairi otso, olce l\'e1 inse, ar apa menie minna marilte tasse, ar tana nero m\'e9tima s\'f3ma n\'e1 faica l\'e1 i minya! Sie euva y\'fa olca *n\'f3nare sinan!\'94\
	
\f0\b 46
\f2\b0  \'cdre en qu\'e9tanes i \uc0\u351 angannar, y\'e9! amillerya ar h\'e1noryar tarner i ettesse ar merner carpa \'f3se. 
\f0\b 47
\f2\b0  Ar qu\'e9n quente senna: \'93Y\'e9! Amillelya ar h\'e1nolyar t\'e1rar i ettesse, m\'e9rala carpa aselye!\'94 
\f0\b 48
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse quentes yenna carampe senna: \'93Man n\'e1 amillinya, ar man nar h\'e1nonyar?\'94 
\f0\b 49
\f2\b0  Ar rahtala m\'e1ryanen hildoryannar quentes: \'93Ela amillinya ar h\'e1nonyar! 
\f0\b 50
\f2\b0  Aiquen ye care i ind\'f3me Atarinyo ye ea menelde, isse n\'e1 h\'e1nonya ar n\'e9\uc0\u351 anya ar amillinya!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 43
\f3\b0  When an unclean spirit comes out from a man, it passes through dry places seeking a place of rest, but it does not find [any]. 
\f1\b 44
\f3\b0  Then it says: \'93I will return to my house from which I moved,\'94 and coming to it, it finds the house empty, but clean and adorned. 
\f1\b 45
\f3\b0  Then it goes away and brings with itself seven other spirits, more wicked than itself, and after going inside they dwell there, and that man's final state is worse than the first! So it will be also for this wicked generation!\'94\
	
\f1\b 46
\f3\b0  As he was still speaking to the crowds, look! his mother and his brothers stood on the outside and wished to speak with him. 
\f1\b 47
\f3\b0  And someone said to him: \'93Behold! Your mother and your brothers are standing on the outside, wishing to speak with you!\'94 
\f1\b 48
\f3\b0  In answer he said to [the one] who spoke to him: \'93Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?\'94 
\f1\b 49
\f3\b0  And reaching out with his hand towards his disciples he said: \'93Behold my mother and my brothers! 
\f1\b 50
\f3\b0  Anyone who does the will of my father who is in heaven, he is my brother and sister and mother!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 13\

\f2\b0 Aure yanasse Y\'e9sus, apa lendes i coallo, h\'e1mane ara i ear, 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  ar hoe \uc0\u351 angali \'f3comner senna. Etta lendes mir lunte ar hamune, \'edre i quanda \u351 anga t\'e1rane i f\'e1rasse. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na rimbe natali sestielissen, qu\'e9tala: \'93Y\'e9! *Rerindo lende ettenna rerien. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Rerieryasse erdeli lantaner ara i malle, ar i aiwi t\'faler ar manter tai. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Exeli lantaner i ondonna, yasse ualte s\'e1me n\'fara cemen, ar orontelte linti\'e9nen, peni\'e9nen n\'fara cemen. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Mal \'edre Anar oronte, anelte urtane, ar peni\'e9nen \uc0\u351 undo hestanelte. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Exeli lantaner im\'edca i neceli, ar i neceli t\'faler ama ar quorner te. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Mal exeli lantaner i m\'e1ra cemenna ar carner y\'e1ve \'96 mine, nap\'e1nine lestali tuxa, exe, *enenquean, exe, *nelequean. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ye same hlaru, nai s\'e9 hl\'e1ra!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 13\

\f3\b0 On that day Jesus, after he went from the house, was sitting beside the sea, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  and great crowds gathered to him. Therefore he went into a boat and sat down, while the entire crowd was standing on the beach. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  Then he spoke to them many things in comparisons, saying: \'93Look! A sower went out to sow. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  As he was sowing [lit. in his sowing] some seems fell beside the road, and the birds came and ate them. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Others fell upon the rock, where they did not have deep soil, and they came up quickly, for lacking deep soil. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  But when the Sun came up, they were scorched, and for lacking root they withered. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns came up and quoked them. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  But others fell upon the good soil and made fruit \'96 one, a hundred added measures, another, sixty, another, thirty. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Who has ears, may he be hearing!\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar i hildor t\'faler senna ar quenter: \'93Mana castalya carpien t\'e9na sestiessen?\'94 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse quentes: \'93Len n\'e1 antana hanya menelo arani\'e9no f\'f3ler, mal sane quenin uas antana. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  An ye same, amba nauva sen antana, ar camuvas \'fave \'96 mal ye ua same, yando ya samis nauva mapana sello. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Etta carpan t\'e9na sestiessen, pan y\'e9tala ualte cenuva, ar hl\'e1rala ualte tuntuva hya hanyuva, 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  ar pa t\'e9 Yesaio apacen n\'e1 carna nanwa: 'Hlari\'e9nen hlaruvalde, mal ualde hanya, ar y\'e9ti\'e9nen y\'e9tuvalde, mal ualde cene. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  An lie sino enda anaie carna tiuca, ar hlarultanten hlarilte \'fa hanquento, ar oholtielte hendultat; sie ualte oi cenuva hendultanten hya hlaruva hlarultanten ar hanyuva endaltanen ar hiruva inwis, nestienyan te!\'94\
	
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Mal valime n\'e1t henduldat, an y\'e9tatte, ar hlaruldat, an hlaritte. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  An n\'e1sie quetin lenna: Rimbe *Eruterc\'e1noli ar failali merner cene yar elde y\'e9tar, mal ualte cenner tai, ar hlare i nati yar elde hlarir, mal ualte hlasse tai.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 10
\f3\b0  And the disciples came to him and said: \'93What is your reason for speaking to them in comparisons?\'94 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  In reply he said: \'93To you it is given to understand the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to those people it is not given. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  For who has, more will be given to him, and he shall receive abundance \'96 but who does not have, also what he has will be taken from him. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Therefore I speak to them in comparisons, since looking they will not see, and hearing they will not perceive or understand, 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  and concerning them Isaiah's prophecy is made true: 'By hearing they will hear, but they do not understand, and by looking they will look, but they will not see. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  For this people's heart has been made fat, and with their ears they hear without reply, and they have shut their eyes; thus they will not ever see with their eyes or hear with their ears and understand with their heart and find repentence, for me to heal them!\'94\
	
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  But happy are your eyes, for they look, and your ears, for they hear. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  And truly I say to you: Numerous prophets and righteous one wanted to see [the things] that you are looking at, but they did not see them, and hear the things that you hear, but they did not hear them.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Etta, elde hlara i sestie pa i *rerindo: 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  \'cdre aiquen hlare i quetta i arani\'e9no mal ua hanya sa, i Olca tule ar rapa oa ya anaie r\'e9rina endaryasse; si n\'e1 ye n\'e1ne r\'e9rina ara i malle. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Ar ye n\'e1ne r\'e9rina i ondosse, ta n\'e1 ye hlare i quetta ar came sa mi alasse. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Ananta uas same \uc0\u351 undo insesse mal lemya ter l\'fame, mal \'edre \u351 angie hya roitie marta i quettanen, lantas oa mi imya l\'fa. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Ar ye n\'e1ne r\'e9rina im\'edca i neceli, si n\'e1 ye hl\'e1ra i quetta, mal randa sino qu\'e1reler ar i laro \'fasahtie quorir i quetta, ar n\'e1se \'fa y\'e1veo. \
	
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Ar ye n\'e1ne r\'e9rina i m\'e1ra cemende, si n\'e1 ye hl\'e1ra i quetta ar hanya sa, ye \'e9 cole y\'e1ve ar care nap\'e1nine lestali \'96 qu\'e9n sina, tuxa, exe, *enenquean, exe, *nelequean!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 18
\f3\b0  Therefore, you hear [imperative!] the comparison about the sower: 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  When anyone hears the word of the kingdom but does not understand it, the Wicked One comes and snatches away what has been sown in his heart; this is [that] which was sown by the road. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  And [the one] that was sown upon the rock, that is [the one] who hears the word and receives it in joy. 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  And yet he does not have [any] root in himself but remains for a time, but when tribulation or persecution happens because of the word, he falls away in the same moment. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  And [the one] that was sown among the thorns, this is [the one] who is hearing the word, but the concerns of this age and the temptation of riches choke the word, and it is without fruit.\
	
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  And [the one] who was sown on the good earth, this is [the one] who is hearing the word and understands it, who indeed bears fruit and makes added measures \'96 this person, a hundred, another, sixty, another, thirty.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Hyana sestie panyanes epe te, qu\'e9tala: \'93Menelo aranie n\'e1 ve n\'e9r ye rende m\'e1ra erde restaryasse. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  \'cdre queni n\'e1ner lorne, \'f1ottorya t\'fale ar rende \'famirwe olvali im\'edca i ore, are oante. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  \'cdre i lasse tuiane ar carne y\'e1ve, t\'e1 yando i \'famirwe olvar t\'faler ama. 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Etta i *coanturo m\'f3li t\'faler ar quenter senna: \'93Heru, ma ualye rende m\'e1ra erde restalyasse? Mallo samis \'famirwe olvali?\'94 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93\'d1otto, n\'e9r, ac\'e1rie nat sina!\'94 Quentelte senna: \'93Ma meril i menuvalme comien te?\'94 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Eques: \'93V\'e1; hya c\'e9 tucuvalde ama yando i ore as i \'famirwe olvar. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Lava y\'fayon ale tenna i y\'e1vie, ar \'edre i y\'e1vie tuluva, quetuvan innar *cirihtuvar: Minyave \'e1 comya i \'famirwe olvar ar nuta te mir loxi n\'e1ven urtaine; t\'e1 mena comien i ore mir hauranya!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b 	24
\f3\b0  Another comparison he put before them, saying: \'93The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  When people were asleep, his enemy came and sowed worthless plants among the grain, and went away. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  When the leaf sprouted and made fruit, then also the worthless plants came up. 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  Therefore the householder's slaves came and said to him: \'93Lord, did you not sow good seed in your field? From where does it have worthless plants?\'94 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93An enemy, a man, has done this thing!\'94 They said to him: \'93Do you want that we will go [= do you wish us to go] to gather them?\'94 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  He said: \'93No; or maybe you will pull up the grain with the worthless plants. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  Let both grow until the harvest, and when the harvest shall come, I will say to the ones that will reap: First gather the worthless plants and bind them into bunches to be burnt; then go to gather the grain into my barn!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Hyana sestie panyanes epe te, qu\'e9tala: \'93Menelo aranie n\'e1 ve erde *sinapio, ya n\'e9r nampe ar empanne restaryasse. 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Ta n\'e1 i ampitya ilye erdion, mal \'e1lienwa n\'e1se i anhoa i quearon ar anaie carna alda, ar sie menelo aiwi tulir ar hirir s\'e9re olvaryassen!\'94\
	
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Hyana sestie quentes t\'e9na: \'93Menelo aranie n\'e1 ve *pulmaxe, ya n\'eds nampe ar nurtane hoe lestassen nelde moleva, tenna ilqua n\'e1ne ortaina!\'94\
	
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  Ilye sine nati Y\'e9sus quente i \uc0\u351 angannar sestiessen, ar \'fa sesti\'e9no uas carampe t\'e9na, 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  carien nanwa ya n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina ter i Eruterc\'e1no ye quente. \'93Pantuvan antonya sestielissen; caruvan sinwe natali nurtane i tulciello!\'94\
\
	
\f3\i Another comparison he put before them, saying: \'93The kingdom of heaven is like a seed of mustard, which a man took and planted in his field. 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  That is the smallest of all seeds, but having grown it is the biggest of the vegetables and has been made a tree, and so heaven's birds came and find rest in its branches!\'94\
	
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  Another comparison he said to them: \'93The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three big measures of flour, until everything was raised!\'94\
	
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  All these things Jesus said to the crowds in comparisons, and without a comparison he did not speak to them, 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  to make true [that] which was said through the Prophet who said: \'93I will open my mouth in comparisons; I will make known things hidden from the foundation!\'94\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  T\'e1, apa mentie i \uc0\u351 angar oa, lendes mir i coa. Ar hildoryar t\'faler senna ar quenter: \'93Lava men hanya i sestie pa i \'famirwe olvar i restasse!\'94 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse eques: \'93Ye rere i m\'e1ra erde n\'e1 i Atanyondo; 
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  i resta n\'e1 i mar, ar i m\'e1ra erde, t\'e9 nar i arani\'e9no yondor, mal i \'famirwe olvar nar i Olco yondor. 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  I \'f1otto ye rende te n\'e1 i Arauco. I y\'e1vie n\'e1 i rando tyel, i *cirihtor nar vali. 
\f0\b 40
\f2\b0  Etta, ve \'edre i \'famirwe olvar nar comyaine ar urtaine n\'e1renen, sie euva i rando tyelde: 
\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  I Atanyondo mentuva valaryar, ar comyuvalte et aranieryallo ilye nati yar tyarir queni lanta ar i queni i racir i \uc0\u351 anye, 
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  ar hatuvaltet mir i urna n\'e1reva. Tasse euvar nieltar ar mulielta nelciva. 
\f0\b 43
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i failar caltuvar ve Anar, Atarelto araniesse. Ye same hlaru, nai hl\'e1ras!\
\
	
\f1\i\b 36
\f3\b0  Then, after sending the crowds away, he went into the boat. And his disciples came to him and said: \'93Let us understand the comparison about the worthless plants in the field!\'94 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  In answer he said: \'93[The one] who sows the good seed is the Son of Man; 
\f1\b 38
\f3\b0  the field is the world, and the good seed, they are the sons of the kingdom, but the worthless plands are the sons of the Wicked One. 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  The enemy who sowed them is the Devil. The harvest is the end of the age, the reapers are angels. 
\f1\b 40
\f3\b0  Therefore, as when the worthless plants are gathered and burnt by fire, so it will be at the conclusion of the age: 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  The Son of Man will send his angles, and they will gather out of his kingdom all things that cause people to fall and the people that break the law, 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  and they will thrown them into the oven of fire. There will be their tears and their grinding of teeth. 
\f1\b 43
\f3\b0  Then the righteous ones will shine like the Sun, in their Father's kingdom. [The one] who has hears, let him be hearing!\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 44
\f2\b0  Menelo aranie n\'e1 ve harma nurtana i restasse, ya n\'e9r hirne ar nurtane, ar alasseryanen autas ar vace i nati yar samis, ar mancas insen resta tana.\
	
\f0\b 45
\f2\b0  Ata menelo aranie n\'e1 ve macar cestala m\'e1re marillar: 
\f0\b 46
\f2\b0  Apa hirie er marilla ya n\'e1ne ammirwa, oantes ar vance ilqua ya s\'e1mes ar mancane sa insen. \
	
\f0\b 47
\f2\b0  Ata menelo aranie n\'e1 ve rembe, h\'e1tina mir i ear ar comyala lingwili ilya nostaleo. 
\f0\b 48
\f2\b0  \'cdre anes quanta, tunceltes ama i f\'e1ranna ar hamuner ar comyaner i m\'e1rar mir veneli, mal i \'famirwar hantelte oa. 
\f0\b 49
\f2\b0  Sie euva m\'ed rando tyel: I vali etelelyuvar ar hyamuvar i olcar i failallon, 
\f0\b 50
\f2\b0  ar hatuvaltet mir i uruite urna. Tasse euvar nieltar ar mulielta nelciva. \
	
\f0\b 51
\f2\b0  Ma hanyanelde ilye sine nati?\'94 Quentelte senna: \'93N\'e1!\'94 
\f0\b 52
\f2\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93Etta ilya parmangolmo, peantana pa menelo aranie, n\'e1 ve n\'e9r, *coantur, ye tala et harmaryallo vinyali ar y\'e1rali!\'94 \
\
	
\f1\i\b 44
\f3\b0  The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hidden in the field, which a man found and hid, and for [-
\f1\b nen
\f3\b0 ] his joy he goes away and sells the things that he has, and trades to himself that field.\
	
\f1\b 45
\f3\b0  Again the kingdom of heaven is like a tradesman seeking good pearls: 
\f1\b 46
\f3\b0  After finding one pearl that was most precious, he went away and sold everything that he had and traded it to himself.\
	
\f1\b 47
\f3\b0  Again the kingdom of heaven is like a net, thrown into the sea and gathering fishes of every kind. 
\f1\b 48
\f3\b0  When it was full, they pulled it up onto the beach and sat down and gathered the good ones into vessels, but the worthless ones they threw away. 
\f1\b 49
\f3\b0  Thus it will be at the conclusion of the age: The angels will go forth and will separate the wicked from the righteous, 
\f1\b 50
\f3\b0  and they will throw them into the fiery oven. There will be their tears and their grinding of teeth.\
	
\f1\b 51
\f3\b0  Do you understand all these things?\'94 They said to him: \'93Yes!\'94 
\f1\b 52
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93Therefore every scribe, instructed about the kingdom of heaven, is like a man, a householder, who brings out from his treasure things new and old!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 53
\f2\b0  Ar t\'e1, apa Y\'e9sus telyane sestier sine, lahtanes n\'f3re talo. 
\f0\b 54
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre t\'fales vehteryanna, peantanes tien *yomencoaltasse. Sie anelte qu\'e1tine elmendanen ar quenter: \'93Mallo n\'e9r sina camne sailie sina ar i taure cardar sine? 
\f0\b 55
\f2\b0  Ma si ua i tautamo yondo? Ma amillerya ua estaina Mar\'eda, ar h\'e1noryar Y\'e1cov ar Y\'f3sef ar S\'edmon ar Y\'fara? 
\f0\b 56
\f2\b0  Ar n\'e9\uc0\u351 aryar, ma ualte illi aselve? Masse, t\'e1, n\'e9r sina camne ilye sine nati?\'94 
\f0\b 57
\f2\b0  Etta anelte r\'fa\uc0\u351 ie senna. Mal Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Eruterc\'e1no ua pene laitie hequa vehteryasse ar coaryasse!\'94 
\f0\b 58
\f2\b0  Ar uas carne tasse rimbe taure cardali, pan pennelte savie.\
\

\f1\i\b 53
\f3\b0  And then, after Jesus completed these comparisons, he crossed land from there. 
\f1\b 54
\f3\b0  And when he came to his home territory, he instructed them in their synagogue. Thus they were filled with wonder and said: \'93From where did this man receive this wisdom and these mighty deeds? Is this not the carpenter's son? Is his mother not Mary, and his brothers Jacob and Joseph and Simon and Juda? 
\f1\b 56
\f3\b0  And his sisters, are they not all with us? Where, then, did this man receive all these things?\'94 
\f1\b 57
\f3\b0  Therefore they were angry with [-
\f1\b nna
\f3\b0 , against] him. But Jesus said to them: \'93A prophet does not lack honor except in his home territory and in his house!\'94 
\f1\b 58
\f3\b0  And he did not do numerous mighty deeds there, since they lacked faith.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 14\

\f2\b0 L\'fame yanasse Herol i *Canastatur hlasse i nyarna pa Y\'e9sus, 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  ar quentes n\'faroryannar: \'93Si n\'e1 Yoh\'e1no i *Sumbando. Anaies ortana qualinallor, ar etta i taure cardar martar s\'e9nen!\'94 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  An Herol y\'e1 nampe Yohannes ar nunte se ar se-panyane mandosse, castanen Heroliasso, Filip h\'e1noryo veri. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  An Yohannes quente senna: \'93Ualye lerta same se!\'94 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Mal \'f3mu mernes nahta se, runces i \uc0\u351 angallo, an sannes pa se ve Eruterc\'e1no. \
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 14\

\f3\b0 At that time Herod the Farthing-ruler heard the story about Jesus, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  and he said to his servants: \'93This is John the Baptist. He has been raised from the dead, and therefore the mighty deeds happen by him!\'94 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  For Herod formerly took John and bound him and put him in jail, by reason of Herodias, the wife of Filip his brother. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  For John said to him: \'93You are not allowed to have her!\'94 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  But though he wanted to kill him, he feared the crowd, for they thought about him as a prophet.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Man \'edre anelte merye Herolo *n\'f3naresse, Heroliasso selye liltane sasse ar antane Herolen alasse ta hoa 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  i quentes h\'e9n vanda: Antauvanes h\'e9n *aiqua ya arcumnes. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  T\'e1, peantaina lo amillerya, h\'e9 quente: \'93\'c1nin anta sisse venesse Yoh\'e1no i *Sumbando cas!\'94 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  \'d3mu ta tyarne sen naire, i aran canne i mo antauvane sa i venden, 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  ar mentanes ar hocirne Yoh\'e1no cas i mandosse. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar carya n\'e1ne talana venesse ar antana i venden, ar h\'e9 talle sa amilleryanna. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ar hildoryar t\'faler ar namper oa i loico ar taller se sapsanna, ar t\'falelte ar nyarner Y\'e9sun.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 6
\f3\b0  But when they were festive on Herod's birthday, Herodias' daughter danced on it and gave Herod a joy so great 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  that he spoke a promise to her: He was going to give her anything that she was going to request. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Then, instructed by her mother, she said: \'93Give me here on a plate John the Baptist's head!\'94 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Though that caused him grief, the king commanded that one was to give it to the maiden, 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  and he sent and cut off John's head in the prison. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  And his head was brought on a platter and given to the maiden, and she brought it to her mother. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  And his disciples came and took away the corpse and brought him to a grave, and they came and told Jesus.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Ire hlasses sa, Y\'e9sus lende oa talo luntesse, eressea n\'f3menna, n\'e1ven erinqua; mal i \uc0\u351 angar hlasser sa ar hilyaner se talunen i ostollon.\
	
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre t\'fales cennes hoa \uc0\u351 anga, ar endarya etelende t\'e9na, ar nestanes hlaiwaltar. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Mal \'edre \uc0\u351 inye lantane, hildoryar t\'faler senna ar quenter: \'93I n\'f3me eressea n\'e1, ar i l\'fame n\'e1 telwa yando s\'ed; \'e1 menta i \u351 angar oa, menieltan mir i mastor mancien inten matta!\'94 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Ualte same maure auti\'e9va. Elde \'e1ten anta matta matien!\'94 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Quentelte senna: \'93Samilme munta sisse hequa massar lempe ar lingwe atta!\'94 
\f0\b 18 
\f2\b0 Eques: \'93\'c1 tala tai sir ninna!\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  T\'e1 cannes i \uc0\u351 angar i caitumnelte undu i salquenna, ar nampes i massar lempe ar lingwe atta, ar y\'e9tala ama menelenna quentes aistie. Ar apa racie i massar etsanteset i hildoin, ar i hildor i \u351 angain. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Ar illi manter ar n\'e1ner qu\'e1tine, ar ortanelte i lemyala rantar: quante *vircolcar yunque. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Mal i manter n\'e1ner *os neri h\'fami lempe, hequa i nissi ar h\'edni.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 13
\f3\b0  When he heard it, Jesus went away from there in a boat, to a lonely place, to be alone; but the crowds heard it and followed him on foot [
\f1\b talunen 
\f3\b0 = by feet, dual] from the cities.\
	
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  And when he came he saw a huge crowd, and his heart went out to them, and he healed their sick ones. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  But when evening fell, his diciples came to him and said: \'93The place is lonely, and the hour is late even now; send the crowds away, for them to to into the villages to trade to themselves food!\'94 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  But Jesus said to them: \'93They do not have [any] need of going away. You give them food to eat!\'94 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  They said to him: \'93We have nothing here except five breads and two fishes!\'94 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  He said: \'93Bring them here to me!\'94 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Then he commanded the crowds that they were to lie down upon the grass, and he took the five breads and two fishes, and looking up towards heaven he spoke a blessing. And after breaking the breads he distributed them to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  And all ate and were filled, and they took up the remaining pieces: twelve baskets full. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  But those who ate were around five thousand men, except for the women and children.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  T\'e1, linti\'e9nen, mauyanes hildoryar mene mir i lunte ar lelya epe se i hyana f\'e1ranna, \'edre mentanes i \uc0\u351 angar oa. \
	
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Ar apa mentanes i \uc0\u351 angar oa, lendes ama mir i oron eressea n\'f3menna, hyamien. \'cdre \u351 inye t\'fale, anes erinqua tasse. 
\f0\b 24 
\f2\b0 S\'ed i lunte n\'e1ne rangar rimbe tuxali norello, \'f1walyaina i falmainen, an s\'e1melte i s\'fare cendeleltanna. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Mal m\'ed cantea tirisse i l\'f3mio t\'fales t\'e9na, vantala i earesse. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  \'cdre cenneltes, anelte *tarastaine, qu\'e9tala: \'93Ta au\uc0\u351 a n\'e1!\'94 Ar caureltanen y\'e1melte. 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Mal mi imya l\'fa Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Huore! Inye n\'e1! \'c1va ruce!\'94 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  P\'e9ter hanquente senna: \'93Heru, qui ta elye n\'e1, \'e1nin cane i tuluvan lyenna olla i neni!\'94 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Eques: \'93Tula!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 22
\f3\b0  Then, quickly, he compelled his disiples to go into the boat and go before him to the other shore, while he sent the crowds away.\
	
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  And after he sent the crowds away, he went up into the mountain to a lonely place, to pray. When evening came, he was alone there.  
\f1\b 24 
\f3\b0 Now the boat was many hundred yards from land, being tormented by the waves, for they had the wind to their face. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  But in the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  When they saw him, they were being troubled, saying: \'93That is a ghost!\'94 And for [-
\f1\b nen
\f3\b0 ] their fear they cried [out]. 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  But in the same moment Jesus said to them: \'93Courage! It is I! Do not be afraid!\'94 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  Peter answered him: \'93Lord, if that is you, command me that I am to come to you across the waters!\'94 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  He said: \'93Come!\'94 \

\f2\i0 \
	T\'e1 P\'e9ter, autala i luntello, vantane olla i neni ar t\'fale Y\'e9sunna. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Mal \'edre cennes i raumo, anes ruhtaina, ar \'edre i n\'e9n *yestane *hlucitas, y\'e1mes: \'93Heru, \'e1ni rehta!\'94 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Mi imya l\'fa Y\'e9sus rahtane m\'e1ryanen ar nampe se, ar quentes senna: \'93N\'e9r pitya savi\'e9no, manen n\'e1 i savielya n\'e1ne iltanca?\'94 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Ar apa lendette mir i lunte, i raumo pustane. 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i queni i luntesse luhtaner epe se, qu\'e9tala: \'93Nanwave nalye Eruo Yondo!\'94 Ar lahtanelte ar t\'faler norenna mi Ennesaret.\
	
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  \'cdre i neri tana n\'f3messe cenner man anes, mentanelte mir i quanda pelila n\'f3rie, ar queni taller senna illi i n\'e1ner hlaiwe. 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  Ar arcanelte senna i rie appumnelte collaryo lane, ar illi i appaner sa camner quanta m\'e1le.\
\
	
\f3\i Then Peter, going away from the boat, walked across the waters and came to Jesus. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  But when he saw the storm, he was terrified, and when the water started to swallow him, he cried: \'93Lord, save me!\'94 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  In the same moment Jesus reached out with his hand and seized him, and he said to him: \'93Man of little faith, how is [it] that your faith was unsteady?\'94 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  And after they [dual] went into the boat, the storm ceased. 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  Then the people in the boat bowed before him, saying: \'93Truly you are God's Son!\'94 And they crossed over and came to land in Gennesaret.\
	
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  When the men of that place saw who he was, they sent [messengers] into the entire surrounding country, and people brought to him all that were sick. 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  And they prayed to him that they might only touch the rim of his cloak, and all that touched it received full health.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 15\

\f2\b0 T\'e1 t\'faler Y\'e9sunna Yer\'fasalemello Farisali ar parmangolmoli, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  \'93Manen n\'e1 i hildolyar racir i haime c\'e1mina i amy\'e1rallon? An ualte sove m\'e1ltat n\'f3 matilte matta!\'94\
	
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse quentes t\'e9na: \'93Manen n\'e1 i elde racir Eruo axan haimeldanen? 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  An Eru quente: '\'c1 anta alcar atarelyan yo amillelyan,' ar: 'Aiquen ye quete ulco pa atar hya amil, \'e9 qualuva.' 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Mal elde quetir: 'Aiquen ye quete ataryanna hya amilleryanna: '*Aiqua a\uc0\u351 ea ya camumnetye nillo, n\'e1 anna Erun' \'96 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  mauya sen i aqua uas anta alcar ataryan hya amilleryan. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  *Imnatyandoli, Yesaia quente mai ve Eruterc\'e1no pa le, \'edre quentes: Lie sina nin-anta alcar p\'e9ltanten, mal endalta n\'e1 haira nillo. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Cumnave *tyerilte ni, peantala Atanion peantier!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 15\

\f3\b0 Then [there] came to Jesus from Jerusalem some Pharisees and scribes, saying: 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  \'93How is [it] that your disciples break the custom received from the elders? For they do not wash their hands before they eat food!\'94\
	
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  In answer he said to them: \'93How is [it] that \ul you\ulnone  break God's command because of [
\f1\b -nen]
\f3\b0  your custom? For God said: 'Give glory to your father and to your mother', and: 'Anyone who speaks evil about father or mother, will without fail [
\f1\b \'e9
\f3\b0  = indeed] die.' 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  But \ul you\ulnone  say: 'Anyone who says to his father or to his mother: 'Anything useful that you were to receive from me, is a gift to God ' \'96 
\f1\b 6 
\f3\b0 it is necessary for him that he does not give glory to his father or to his mother at all. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  Hypocrites, Isaiah spoke well as a prophet concerning you, when he said: This people give me glory with their lips [-
\f1\b nten
\f3\b0 , dual instrumental], but their heart is far from me. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Emptily [= in vain] they worship me, teaching Men's teachings!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar tultanes i \uc0\u351 anga ar quente t\'e9na: \'93\'c1 lasta ar hanya! 
\f0\b 11 
\f2\b0 L\'e1 ya tule minna ter queno anto vahta atan, mal ya ettule antoryallo n\'e1 ya vahta atan!\'94\

\f0\b 	12 
\f2\b0 T\'e1 i hildor t\'faler ar quenter senna: \'93Ma istal in \'edre i Farisar hlasser i quetta, anelte r\'fa\uc0\u351 ie?\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse quentes: \'93Ilya olva ye meneldea Atarinya ua empanne, nauva t\'facina ama as \uc0\u351 unduryar. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Lava tien n\'e1ve! Lacen\'edti *tulyandoli nalte. Mal qui lacen\'edte qu\'e9n tulya lacen\'edte qu\'e9n, y\'fayo lantuvat mir sapta!\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse P\'e9ter quente senna: \'93\'c1men anta tercen pa i sestie!\'94 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  T\'e1 quentes: \'93Ma y\'fa elde loitar hanya? 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Ma ualde ista in ilqua ya tule minna ter i anto, mene mir i hirdi ar auta mir i *aucelie? 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Mal yar ettulir i antollo ettulir i endallo, ar tai vahtar atan. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  An et i endallo tulir olce sanwar, nahtier, vestaleracie, *\'fapuhtale, pilwi, h\'farala *vettier, naiquetier. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Tai nar yar vahtar atan, mal qui atan mate matta \'fas\'f3vine m\'e1nten, ta ua vahta se!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 10
\f3\b0  And he summoned the crowd and said to them: \'93Listen and understand! 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  [It is] not [that] which comes inside through a person's mouth [that] soils a man, but [that] which comes out from his mouth is [that] which soils a man.\
	
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  Then the disciples came and said to him: \'93Do you know that when the Pharisees heard the word, they were angry?\'94 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  In answer he said: \'93Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant, will be pulled up with its roots. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  Let them be! Blind leavers they are. But if a blind person leads a blind person, both will fall [dual] into a pit!\'94 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  In answer Peter said to him: \'93Give us insight about the comparison!\'94 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  Then he said: \'93Do you as well fail to understand? 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Do you know know that [that] which comes in through the mouth, goes into the entrails and passes into the sewer? [
\f1\b Aucelie
\f3\b0  = away-flowing.] 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  But what comes out from the mouth come out from the heart, and \ul they\ulnone  soil a man!\'94 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  And out of the heart come evil thoughts, killings, marriage-breaking, fornication, thefts, lying testimonies, blasphemies. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  \ul They\ulnone  are [the things] that soil a man, but if a man eats food with unwashed hands, that does not soil him!\'94\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Autala talo, Y\'e9sus s\'ed lende oa mir i m\'e9nar T\'edro ar S\'edrono. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! Can\'e1anya n\'eds ente n\'f3riellon ett\'fale ar y\'e1me, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'d3rava nisse, Lavirion! Selyenya n\'e1 ulcave haryana lo rauco!\'94  
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Mal isse ua hanquente senna quetta. Ar hildoryar t\'faler senna ar arcaner senna, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1se menta oa, an y\'e1mas ca vi!\'94 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse eques: \'93\'danen mentana aiquenna hequa i vanwe m\'e1mannar Isra\'e9lo coallo!\'94 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  \'cdre i n\'eds t\'fale, luhtanes epe se, qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, \'e1ni manya!\'94 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse quentes: \'93Ua vanima mapie i h\'ednion massa ar hatie sa i huonnar!\'94 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  H\'e9 quente: \'93N\'e1, Heru, mal i huor matir i mier yar lantar sarnollo herultaiva!\'94 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus hanquente senna: \'93A n\'eds, savielya t\'fara n\'e1; nai martuva lyen ve as\'e1viel!\'94 Ar i selye n\'e1ne nestana l\'fame yanallo.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 21
\f3\b0  Passing from there, Jesus now went away into the regions of Tyre and Sidon. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  And behold! a Canaanite woman from those countries came out and cried, saying: \'93Have mercy on me, Son of David! My daughter is badly possessed by a demon!\'94 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  But he did not answer her a word. And his disciples came to him and petitioned of him, saying: \'93Send her away, for she is crying behind us!\'94 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  In answer he said: \'93I was not sent to anyone except to the lost sheep from the house of Israel!\'94 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  When the woman came, she bowed before him, saying: \'93Lord, help me!\'94 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  In answer he said: \'93It is not proper, taking the children's bread and throwing it to the dogs!\'94
\f1\b  27
\f3\b0  She said: \'93Yes, Lord, but the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from the table of their lords [or, masters]!\'94
\f1\b  28
\f3\b0  Then Jesus answered her: \'93O woman, your faith is great; may it happen to you as you have believed!\'94 And the daughter was healed from that hour.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Lahtala n\'f3rie talo, Y\'e9sus t\'fare hare i Earenna Alileo, ar apa menie ama mir oron hamunes tasse. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  T\'e1 hoe \uc0\u351 angali t\'faler senna, t\'falula queneli i n\'e1ner *\'fal\'e9vime, tapte, lalev\'edte, \'fape, ar nimpe rimbe hyane l\'e9lissen, 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  ar sie i \uc0\u351 anga n\'e1ne quanta elmendanen \'edre cennelte i \'fapar qu\'e9ta ar i *\'fal\'e9vimar vantea ar i lalev\'edti c\'e9na, ar antanelte alcar Isra\'e9lo Ainon. \
	
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus tultane hildoryar insenna ar quente: \'93Endanya etelelya i \uc0\u351 anganna, an s\'ed el\'e9mielte asinye auressen nelde, ar samilte munta matien; ar uan mere menta te oa \'fa mati\'e9no. C\'e9 nauvalte acca lumbe i mallesse!\'94 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Mal hildoryar quenter senna: \'93Mallo, mi eressea n\'f3me sina, \'f1etuvalme f\'e1rea massa \uc0\u351 angan ya ta hoa n\'e1?\'94 \
\
	
\f1\i\b 29
\f3\b0  Crossing country from there, Jesus came near to the Sea of Galilee, and after going up into a mountain he sat down there. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  Then great crowds came to him, bringing some that were lame, maimed [
\f1\b tapte
\f3\b0 : impeded], blind, dumb, and ailing in many other ways, 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  and so the crowd was full of wonder when they saw the dumb ones speak or the lame walk and the blind see, and they gave glory to the God of Israel.\
	
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  But Jesus summoned his disciples to himself and said: \'93My heart goes out to the crowd, for now they have remained with me for three days, and they have nothing to eat; and I do not want to send them away without eating. Maybe they will be too tired on the road!\'94 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  But his disciples said to him: \'93From where, in this lonely place, are we to get sufficient bread for a crowd that is so big?\'94\
\

\f0\i0\b 	34
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Mana n\'f3te massaron samilde?\'94 Quentelte: \'93Otso, ar n\'f3time lingwili!\'94 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  T\'e1, apa cannes i \uc0\u351 angan i caitumnelte i talamesse, 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  nampes i matsar otso ar, apa antave hantale, rance tai ar etsante tai i hildoin, ar i hildor i \uc0\u351 angain. 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  Ar illi manter ar n\'e1ner qu\'e1tine, ar comyanelte i lemyala rantar: quante *vircolcar otso. 
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  Ananta i manter n\'e1ner neri h\'fami canta, hequa i nissi ar h\'edni. 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  Ar apa mentave i \uc0\u351 angar oa, lendes mir i lunte ar t\'fale i m\'e9nannar Mahar\'e1no.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 34
\f3\b0  And Jesus said to them: \'93What number of breads do you have?\'94 They said: \'93Seven, and a few fishes!\'94 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  Then, after he commanded the crowd that they were to lie down on the ground, 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  he took the seven breads and, after giving thanks, he broke them and distributed them to the disciples, and the disciples to the crowds. 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  And all ate and were filled, and they gathered the remaining pieces: seven full baskets. 
\f1\b 38
\f3\b0  And yet those who ate were four thousand men, except for the women and children. 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  And after sending the crowds away, he went into the boat and came to the regions of Magadan. \
\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 16
\f2\b0  \
Ar i Farisar ar Sand\'facear t\'faler senna, ar tyastien se arcanelte sello i tanumnes tien tanwa menello. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse quentes t\'e9na: [
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0 ] 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  \'93Ulca ar \'favoronda *n\'f3nare cestea tanwa, mal tanwa ua nauva antaina san, hequa Y\'f3no tanwa!\'94 Ar oantes tello ar lende oa.\
	
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  S\'ed i hildor lahtaner i hyana f\'e1ranna, ar ualte *renne tala massa. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Cima ar ettira pa i *pulmaxe Farisaron ar Sand\'facearon!\'94 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Carampelte pa si mici inte, qu\'e9tala: \'93Ualve talle massar!\'94 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Istala ta, Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Manen n\'e1 i carpalde mici inde pa penie massar? 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ma en ualde hanya, ar ualde enyale i massar lempe i h\'famin lempe, ar i n\'f3te *vircolcaron yar ortanelde? 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Hya i massar otso i h\'famin canta, ar i n\'f3te *vircolcaron yar ortanelde? 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Manen, t\'e1, ualde hanya i uan quente lenna pa massar? Mal *ettira pa i *pulmaxe Farisaron ar Sand\'facearon!\'94 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  T\'e1 hanyanelte i quentes t\'e9na i *ettirumnelte, l\'e1 pa i *pulmaxe massaron, mal pa i peantie Farisaron ar Sand\'facearon.\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 16\

\f3\b0 And the Pharisees and Sadducees came to him, and to test him they asked of him that he would show them a sign from heaven. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  In answer he said to them: [
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0 ] 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  \'93An evil and unfaithful generation is seeking a sign, but a sign will not be given them, except Jonah's sign!\'94 And he went off from them and went away.\
	
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Now the disciples crossed over to the other side, and they did not remember to bring bread. 
\f1\b 6 
\f3\b0 Jesus said to them: \'93Take heed and watch out concerning the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees!\'94 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  They spoke about this among themselves, saying: \'93We did not bring breads!\'94 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Knowing that, Jesus said: \'93How is it that you speak among yourselves about lacking breads? 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Do you still not understand, and do you not recall the five breads for the five thousand, and the number of baskets that you took up? 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Or the seven breads for the four thousand, and the number of baskets that you took up? 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  How, then, is [it] you do not understand that I did not speak to you about breads? But watch out concerning the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees!\'94 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  Then they understood that he said to them that they were to watch out, not concerning the leaven of breads, but concerning the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Apa Y\'e9sus t\'fale i m\'e9nannar Cesar\'e9a Filippio, maquentes hildoryannar: \'93Man queni quetir in i Atanyondo n\'e1?\'94 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Quentelte: \'93Queneli quetir: Yohannes i *Sumbando, exeli: El\'eda, exeli: Yerem\'eda hya qu\'e9n i Eruterc\'e1noron!\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mal elde, man quetilde i nanye?\'94 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse P\'e9ter quente senna: \'93Elye i Hristo n\'e1, i coirea Aino yondo!\'94 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus hanquente senna: \'93Valima nalye, S\'edmon Var-Y\'f3na, an hr\'e1ve yo serce uat apantane sa lyen, mal meneldea Atarinya. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Ar quetin lyenna: Elye P\'e9ter, ar ondo sinasse carastuvan ocombenya, ar Mandosto andor uar tur\'fava sa. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Antauvan lyen menelo arani\'e9no *latili, ar ilqua ya nutuvalde cemende nauva n\'fatina menelde, ar ilqua ya lehtal cemende nauva lehtaina menelde!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 13
\f3\b0  After Jesus came to the regions of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples: \'93Who do people say that the Son of Man is?\'94 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  They said: \'93People say: John the Baptist, others: Eliah, others: Jeremiah or one of the Prophets. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93But you, who do you say that I am?\'94 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  In answer Peter said to him: \'93You are the Christ, the son of the living God!\'94 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Jesus answered him: \'93Happy you are, Simon Bar-Jonah, for flesh and blood did not [dual] reveal it to you, but my heavenly Father. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  And I say to you: You [are] Peter, and on this rock I will build my congregation, and the gates of Mandos [/Hades] will not overpower it. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and everything that you will bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and everything that you loose on earth will be loosened in heaven!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  T\'e1 tulcave cannes i hildoin i \'e1valte quetumne aiquenna in anes i Hristo.\
	
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  L\'fame yanallo Y\'e9sus *yestane tana hildoryain i mauyane sen lelya Yer\'fasalemenna ar perpere rimbe natali ho i *amy\'e1rar ar parmangolmor, ar n\'e1ve nahtana, ar i nelya auresse n\'e1ve ortana. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Mal P\'e9ter talle se arana ar *yestane carpa tulcave senna, qu\'e9tala: \'93Na moica imlen, Heru! Sie laume euva elyen!\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Mal s\'e9 quernexe ar quente P\'e9terenna: \'93Heca ca ni, S\'e1tan! Meril tyare ni lanta, an sanal, l\'e1 Eruo sanwi, mal tai atanion!\'94\
	
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus quente hildoryannar: \'93Qui aiquen mere tule apa ni, nai laluvas inse ar ortauva tarwerya ar hilyuva ni.\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  Then he firmly commanded the disciples that they were not going to say to anyone that he was the Christ. \

\f1\b 	21
\f3\b0  Then from that time Jesus began to show to his disciples that it was necessary for him to go to Jerusalem and to suffer many things from the elders and scribes, and to be slain, and on the third day to be raised. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  But Peter brought him aside [
\f1\b ara-na
\f3\b0 ] and started to speak firmly to him, saying: \'93Be kind [
\f1\b moica
\f3\b0  = gentle] to yourself, Lord! It will by no means be so to you!\'94 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  But he turned and said to Peter: \'93Begone behind me, Satan! You want to cause me to fall, for you think, not God's thoughts, but those of men!\'94
\f1\b  \
	24
\f3\b0  Then Jesus said to his disciples: \'93If anyone wishes to come after me, may he deny himself and lift up his cross and follow me.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 	25
\f2\b0  An aiquen ye mere rehta cuilerya, sen nauvas vanwa; mal aiquen yeo cuile n\'e1 vanwa m\'e1rienyan, hiruva sa. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  An qui atan came i quanda mar, mal cuilerya n\'e1 vanwa, manen ta n\'e1 sen a\uc0\u351 ea? 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  An i Atanyondo tuluva Ataryo alcaresse as valaryar, ar t\'e1 paityuvas ilquenen ve lengierya. 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna in ear queneli i t\'e1rar sisse i laume tyavuvar qualme n\'f3 cenilte i Atanyondo t\'fala aranieryasse!\'94\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  For anyone who desires to save his life, to him it will be lost; but anyone whose life is lost for my sake [lit. my good], will find it. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  For if a man receives the whole world, but his life is lost, how is that beneficial to him? 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  For the Son of Man will come in his Father's glory with his angels, and then he will reward everyone according to his behavior. 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you that there are some people that are standing here that by no means will taste death before they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 17\

\f2\b0 Auri enque epeta Y\'e9sus talle P\'e9ter ar Y\'e1cov ar Yohannes h\'e1norya, ar tulyane te ama mir t\'e1ra oron, t\'e9 erinque. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar anes vistana epe te, ar cendelerya caltane ve Anar, ar lanneryar n\'e1ner alcarinque ve cala. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! M\'f3ses ar El\'eda tanner intu tien, qu\'e9tala \'f3se. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Mal P\'e9ter carampe ar quente Y\'e9sunna: \'93Heru, vanima n\'e1 i nalme sisse! Qui meril, ortauvan sisse *lancoar nelde: er lyen ar er M\'f3sen ar er El\'edan!\'94 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  \'cdre i quettar en n\'e1ner antoryasse, y\'e9! calima fanya teltane te, ar enge \'f3ma et i fanyallo ya quente: \'93Si yondonya n\'e1, i melda, pa ye nanye fastaina; \'e1 lasta senna!\'94 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Hl\'e1rala si, i hildor lantaner cendeleltasse ar n\'e1ner ita caurie. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus t\'fale hare t\'e9na, ar appala te quentes: \'93\'c1 orta, ar \'e1va ruce!\'94 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  \'cdre ortanelte hendultat, cennelte *\'faquen hequa Y\'e9sus immo. \
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 17\

\f3\b0 Six days thereafter Jesus brought [along] Peter and Jacob and John his brother, and led them up into a lofty mountain, they alone. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And he was changed before them, and his face shone like the sun, and his clothes were radiant as light. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And behold! Moses and Eliah showed themselves [
\f1\b intu
\f3\b0 , dual] to them, speaking with him. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  But Peter spoke and said to Jesus: \'93Lord, [it] is good that we are here. If you wish, I will erect here three tents: one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah!\'94 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  While the words were still in his mouth, behold! a bright cloud overshadowed them, and there was a voice out of the cloud that said: \'93This is my son, the beloved, with [
\f1\b pa
\f3\b0  = concerning] whom I am pleased; listen to him!\'94 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  Hearing this, the disiciples fell on their face and were extremely afraid. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  Then Jesus came near to them, and touching them he said: \'93Rise, and do not fear!\'94 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  When they raised their eyes, they saw no one except Jesus himself.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Tieltasse undu i orontello, Y\'e9sus canne tien, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1va nyare aiquenen pa i cenie n\'f3 i Atanyondo anaie ortana qualinillon!\'94\
	
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Mal i hildor maquenter: \'93T\'e1 manen n\'e1 in i parmangolmor quetir in El\'eda maurenen tuluva minyave?\'94 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse eques: \'93El\'eda \'e9 tuluva ar envinyatauva ilye nati. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Mal quetin lyenna i El\'eda ut\'falie yando s\'ed, ar ualte hanyane man anes, mal carner sen ve mernelte. Mi imya l\'e9 i Atanyondo perperuva m\'e1ltanten.\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i hildor hanyaner i quentes t\'e9na pa Yohannes i *Sumbando.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 9
\f3\b0  On their way down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying: \'93Do not tell anyone about the sigth [= vision] before the Son of man has been raised from the dead!\'94\
	
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  But the disciples asked: \'93Then how is [it] that the scribes say that Elijah by necessity will come first?\'94 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  In answer he said: \'93Elijah will indeed come and will renew all things. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  But I say to you that Elijah has come even now, and they did not understand who he was, but did to him as they wished. In the same manner the Son of Man will suffer at their hands.\'94 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them about John the Baptist.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre t\'falelte i \uc0\u351 anganna, n\'e9r t\'fale senna, lantala occaryanta epe se 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  ar qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, \'f3rava yondonyasse, an n\'e1se *r\'e1nahlaiwa ar nimpa, an lantas rimbave mir i n\'e1re ar rimbave mir i n\'e9n,  
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  ar tallenyes hildolyannar, mal ualte polde nesta se!\'94 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente: \'93\'davoronda ar r\'edcina *n\'f3nare, manen andave mauya nin lemya aselde? Manen andave mauya nin cole le? \'c1se tala ninna!\'94 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus carampe tulcave senna, ar i rauco ett\'fale sello, ar i seldo n\'e1ne nestana l\'fame yanallo. \
\
	
\f1\i\b 14
\f3\b0  And when they came to the crowd, a man came to him, falling to his knees [dual] before him 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  and saying: \'93Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is moon-sick and ailing, and he falls frequently into the fire and frequently into the water, 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  and I brought him to your disciples, but they could not heal him!\'94 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said: \'93Unfaithful and twisted generation, how long is it necessary for me to remain with you? How long is it necessary for me to bear you? Bring him to me!\'94 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  Then Jesus spoke firmly to it, and the demon came out of him, and the boy was healed from that hour.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Epeta i hildor t\'faler v\'e9rave Y\'e9sunna ar quenter: \'93Manen n\'e1 in elme uar polde et-hatitas?\'94 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Pitya savieldanen. An n\'e1sie quetin lenna: Qui samilde savie ve erde *sinapio, quetuvalde oron sinanna: Leva silo tar, ar levuvas, ar munta nauva \'fac\'e1rima len. [
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0 ]\
	
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  \'cdre anelte comyane Alileasse Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93I Atanyondo nauva *vartaina mannar atanion, 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  ar nahtuvaltes, ar i nelya auresse nauvas ortana!\'94 Etta s\'e1melte lunga naire. \
\
	
\f1\i\b 19
\f3\b0  Thereafter the disciples came privately to Jesus and said: \'93How is [it] that we could not throw it out?\'94 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93Because of your small faith. For truly I say to you: If you have faith like a seed of mustard, you will say to this mountain: Move form here to there, and it will move, and nothing will be impossible to you. [
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0 ]\
	
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  When they were gathered in Galilee Jesus said to them: \'93The Son of Man will be betrayed into the hands of men,  and they will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised!\'94 Therefore they had deep grief.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  \'cdre t\'falelte Capernaumenna, i neri comyala i \ul racma\ulnone  atta t\'faler P\'e9terenna ar quente: \'93Ma *peantarelda ua paitya i *\ul racma\ulnone  atta?\'94 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Quentes: \'93Caris.\'94 Mal \'edre lendes mir i coa, n\'f3 polles quete, Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Mana sanal, S\'edmon? Ho man cemeno arani camir *tungwe hya *rantie? Yondoltallon hya etteleallon?\'94 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  \'cdre h\'e9 quente, \'93I etteleallon,\'94 Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93T\'e1 i yondor \'e9 nar l\'e9re. 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Mal in uangwe caruva te r\'fa\uc0\u351 ie, alye lelya i earenna, hata ampa, ar \'e1 mapa i minya lingwe tulila ama \'96 ar \'edre latyal antorya, hiruval \ul stater\ulnone . \'c1 mapa ta ar \'e1ten anta sa nin ar lyen!\'94\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  When they came to Capernaum, the men collecting [lit. gathering] the two dracmas came to Peter and said: \'93Does not your [pl.] teacher pay the two dracmas?\'94 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  He said: \'93He does.\'94 But when he went into the house, before he could speak, Jesus said: \'93What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of earth receive tax or tribute? From their sons or from foreigners?\'94 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  When he said: \'93From the foreigners,\'94 Jesus said to him: \'93Then the sons are indeed free. 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  But that we will not make them angry, you go to the sea, throw a hook, and take the first fish coming up \'96 and when you open its mouth, you will find a \ul stater\ulnone . Take that and give it to them for me and for you!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 18\

\f2\b0 L\'fame yanasse i hildor t\'faler hare Y\'e9sunna ar quenter: \'93Man nanwave n\'e1 i ant\'fara menelo araniesse?\'94 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar apa yaldes pitya h\'edna insenna, se-tyarnes tare i endesse 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  ar quente: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lenna: Qui ualde hire inwis ar nar ve pitye h\'edni, laume tuluvalde mir menelo aranie. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Etta, aiquen ye care inse nalda ve h\'edna sina, isse n\'e1 i ant\'fara menelo araniesse; 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  ar aiquen ye came erya taite h\'edna essenyanen, came n\'ed. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Mal aiquen ye tyare lanta er mici sine i savir nisse \'96 sen nauva ambe a\uc0\u351 ea qui *mulondo n\'e1ne panyana *os yahtya, ar anes qu\'f3rina m\'ed n\'fara ear.\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 18 \

\f3\b0 At that time the disciples came near to Jesus and said: \'93Who really is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?\'94 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And after he called a small child to himself, he caused it to stand in the middle 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  and said: \'93Truly I say to you: If you do not find repentance and are like small children, you will by no means come into the kingdom of heaven. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  Therefore, anyone who makes himself lowly like this chind, he is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven; 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  and anyone who receives a single such child in my name, receives me. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  But anyone who causes to fall one among these who believe in me \'96 to him it is more beneficial if a millstone was put around his neck, and he was drowned in the deep sea.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Horro i marden \'fasahtieryain! An i \'fasahtier maurenen tuluvar, man horro i atanen yenen i \'fasahtie tule! 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Mal qui m\'e1lya hya talelya ty\'e1ra lantelya, \'e1sa aucire ar hata sa lyello! Mene *lalev\'edte hya tapta mir coivie n\'e1 lyen arya epe n\'e1ve h\'e1tina arwa m\'e1 atto hya t\'e1l atto mir i oira n\'e1re! 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar qui hendelya ty\'e1ra lantelya, \'e1sa narca ettenna ar hata sa lyello! Mene mir coivie arwa erya hendo n\'e1 lyen arya epe n\'e1ve h\'e1tina arwa hen atto mir i uruite Ehenna! 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Cena in ualde nattire aiquen mici pityar sine! An quetin lenna i valaltar menelde illume y\'e9tar meneldea Atarinyo cendele.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 7
\f3\b0  Woe to the world for its temptations! For the temptations will by necessity come, but woe to the man by whom the temptation comes! 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  But if your hand or your foot is causing your fall, cut it off and throw it [away] from you! To go lame or maimed [
\f1\b tapta
\f3\b0 , impeded] into life is to you better than being thrown having two hands or two feet into the eternal fire! 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And if your eye is causing your fall, tear it out and throw it [away] from you! To go into life having a single eye is to you better than being thrown having two eyes into the fiery Gehenna! 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  See that you [pl.] do not despise anyone among these little ones! For I say to you that their angels in heaven always look at my heavenly Father's face.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  An i Atanyondo ut\'falie rehtien ya n\'e1ne vanwa. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Mana sanalde? Qui n\'e9r same m\'e1mar tuxa, ar er mici te ranya, ma uas auta ho i nerte *neterquean i orontissen, ar menis cestien i ranyala m\'e1ma? 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Ar qui \'e9 hirises \'96 n\'e1sie qu\'e9tan lenna, pa m\'e1ma tana samis alasse t\'fara epe ya samis pa i nerte *neterquean i uar ar\'e1nie. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Mi imya l\'e9, meneldea Atarinyo ind\'f3me ua in erya mici pityar sine nauva vanwa.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 11
\f3\b0  For the Son of Man has come to save that which was lost. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  What do you think? If a man has a hundred sheep, and one among them strays, does he not go away from the ninti-nine on the mountains, and he goes to seek the straying sheep? 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  And if he does find it \'96 truly I say to you, about that shep he has a joy greater than [that] which he has about the ninety-nine that have not strayed. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  In the same manner, my heavenly Father's will is not that a single among these little ones will be lost.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ente, qui h\'e1nolya \'facare, mena ar \'e1se naitya imbe ly\'e9 ar s\'e9 erinque. Qui lastas lyenna, e\'f1\'e9tiel h\'e1nolya. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Mal qui uas lasta, \'e1 tala aselye er hya atta ambe, an i antonen astarmor atto hya neldeo ilya natto nauva tulcana. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Qui uas lasta t\'fana, queta i ocombenna. Qui loitas lasta y\'fa i ocombenna, nauvas lyen ve qu\'e9n i n\'f3rion ar ve *tungwemo. \
	
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna, ilqua ya nutilde cemende nauva n\'fatina menelde, ar ilqua ya lehtalde cemende nauva lehtana menelde. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ata n\'e1sie quetin lenna: Qui atta mici le n\'e1t er s\'e1mo cemende arcien nat, ta martuva tunt meneldea Atarinyanen. An yasse atta hya nelde nar comyane mi essenya, tasse ean endaltasse. \
\
	
\f1\i\b 15
\f3\b0  Furthermore, if your brother sins, go and rebuke him between you and he alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  But if he does not listen, bring with you one or two others, for by the mouth of two or three witnesses every affair shall be established. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  If he does not listen to them [dual], speak to the congregation. If he fails to listen to the congregation as well, he is to be to you as a person of the nations or as a tax collector.\
	
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you, everything that you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and everything that you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Again I truly say to you: If two among you are of one mind on earth to request something, that will happen for them by my heavenly Father. For where two or thre are gathered in my name, there I am in their midst.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  T\'e1 P\'e9ter t\'fale ar quente senna: \'93Heru, mana n\'f3te i l\'faron yassen h\'e1nonya lerta \'facare ninna ar apsenuvan sen? Tenna l\'far otso?\'94 Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Qu\'e9tan lyenna, l\'e1 tenna l\'far otso, mal tenna *otoquean l\'far otso! 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Etta menelo aranie n\'e1 ve n\'e9r, aran, ye merne same on\'f3tie as m\'f3liryar. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  \'cdre *yestanes i on\'f3tie, q\'faen arwa rohto \ul talention\ulnone  h\'fami quean n\'e1ne tulyana senna. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Pan uas s\'e1me f\'e1re paitien sen, herurya canne i mo vacumne se, as verirya ar h\'ednaryar, ar ilqua ya s\'e1mes, paitien i rohta. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Etta i m\'f3l lantane undu ar luhtane epe se, qu\'e9tala: \'93Sama c\'f3le nin, ar paityuvan nan ilqua lyen!\'94 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  \'c1paina endaryanna, sana m\'f3lo heru lehtane se ar apsenne rohtarya.\
\

\f1\i\b 21
\f3\b0  Then Peter came and said to them: \'93Lord, what is number of times when my brother may sin against me and I am to forgive him? As far as seven times?\'94 Jesus said to him: \'93I say to you, not as far as seven times, but as far as seventy times seven! 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  Therefore the kingdom of heaven is like a man, a king, who wished to have a reckoning with his thralls. 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  When he started the reckoning, a person having a debt of  ten thousand talents was brought to him. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  Since he did not have enough to pay him, his lord commanded that one was to sell him, with his wife and his children, and everything that he had, in order to pay the debt. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  Therefore the thrall fell down and bowed before him, saying: \'93Have patience with me [
\f1\b nin
\f3\b0  = for me], and I will pay back everything to you!\'94 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  Being touched to his heart, the lord of that thrall released him and forgave his debt.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Mal sana m\'f3l etelende ar hirne qu\'e9n i hyane m\'f3lion, ye s\'e1me sen rohta \ul len\'e1rion\ulnone  tuxa. Ar m\'e1pala se, *yestanes quore se, qu\'e9tala: \'93\'c1nin paitya rohtalya!\'94 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i hyana m\'f3l lantane undu ar arcane senna, qu\'e9tala: \'93Sama c\'f3le nin, ar paityuvan lyen!\'94 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Mal uas merne, ono lendes ar hante h\'e9 mir mando tenna h\'e9 paityumne rohtarya. 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Etta, \'edre i hyane m\'f3li cenner ya martane, s\'e1melte tumna naire, ar lendelte ar nyarner herultan ilqua ya martanelyane. 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  T\'e1 herurya tultane se ar quente senna: \'93Olca m\'f3l, quanda rohtalya apsennen lyen, \'edre arcanel ninna! 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Lau t\'e1 carumnel mai qui y\'fa ly\'e9 oravumne i hyana m\'f3lesse ye enge aselye, ve inye antane lyen oravie?\'94 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  Ar n\'e1la r\'fa\uc0\u351 ea, herurya antane se ollo i *mandonturin, tenna paityumnes quanda rohtarya. 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  M\'ed imya l\'e9 meneldea Atarinya y\'fa caruva len qui ualde ilquen apsene h\'e1noryan endaldallo!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 28
\f3\b0  But that slave went out and found a person of the other slaves, who had to him a debt of a hundred denarii. And seizing him, he began to choke him, saying: \'93Pay me your debt!\'94 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  Then the other slave fell down and made request of him, saying: \'93Have patience with me, and I will pay you!\'94 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  But he did not want to, but he went and threw him into prison until he would pay his debt. 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  Therefore, when the other slaves saw [that] which happened, they had deep grief, and they went and told to their lord everything that had happened. 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  Then his lord summoned him and said to him: \'93Wicked slave, your entire debt I forgave you, when you asked of me! 
\f1\b 33 
\f3\b0 Would you not then do well if you as well would have mercy on the other slave who was with you, as I gave you mercy?\'94 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  And being angry, his lord gave him over to the jailers, until he was going to pay his entire debt. 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  In the same manner my heavenly Father will also do to you if you do not everyone forgive his brother from your heart!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 19 \

\f2\b0 Ar apa Y\'e9sus telyane ilye quettar sine oantes Alileallo ar t\'faler i m\'e9nannar Y\'fareo, Yordan pella. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar hoe \uc0\u351 angali hilyaner se, ar te-nestanes tasse.\
	
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar Farisali t\'faler senna tyastien se, qu\'e9tala: \'93Ma lerta n\'e9r lehta inse veriryallo ilya castanen?\'94 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse eques: \'93Ma ualde hentane i ye ontane tu, i yestallo carne tu hanu yo n\'ed 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  ar quente: Sina castanen n\'e9r autuva ataryallo ar amilleryallo ar himyuva verirya, ar nauvatte hr\'e1ve er \'96 ? 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Sie uatte ambe atta, mal hr\'e1ve er. Etta, ya Eru ap\'e1nie nu er yalta, \'e1va lave atanen hyare!\'94 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Quentelte senna: \'93T\'e1 manen n\'e1 i M\'f3ses canne i mo antauva sen tecie *aumental\'e9va ar panyuva se oa?\'94 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Hranga endaldanen M\'f3ses l\'e1ve i lertalde lehta inde verildallon, mal l\'e1 enge sie i yestallo. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar quetin lenna: Aiquen ye lehta immo veriryallo hequa *\'fapuhti\'e9nen, ar verya exenna, race vestale!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 19\

\f3\b0 And after Jesus completed all these words he went away from Galilee and came to the regions of Judea, beyond the Jordan. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And great crowds followed him, and he healed them there.\
	
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And some Pharisees came to him to test him, saying: \'93May a man divorce [lit. loosen himself from] his wife for every [conceivable] reason?\'94 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  In answer he said: \'93Did you not read that [he] who created them, from the beginning made them male and female and said: For this reason a man will abandon his father and his mother and will stick to his wife, and they [dual] will be one flesh \'96 ? Thus they [dual] are no more two, but one flesh. Therefore, [that] which God has put under one yoke, do not let man separate!\'94 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  They said to him: \'93Then how is [it] that Moses commanded that one is to give her a writing of divoce [
\f1\b aumentie
\f3\b0 , away-sending] and is to put her away?\'94 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93Because of your hard heart Moses allowed that you may divorce [lit. loosen yourselves from] your wifes, but it was not so from the beginning. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And I say to you: Anyone who divorces his wife except because of fornication, and gets married to another, breaks marriage!\'94\

\f0\i0\b \

\f2\b0 	 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  I hildor quenter senna: \'93Qui ea sie pa veru yo veri, vestale ua a\uc0\u351 ea!\'94 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Illi uar pole came i quetie, mal rie i samir i anna. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  An ear *viel\'f3rali i n\'e1ner n\'f3ne sie amillelto m\'f3nallo, ar ear *viel\'f3rali i n\'e1ner c\'e1rine *viel\'f3re lo atani, ar ear *viel\'f3rali i ac\'e1rier inte *viel\'f3re menelo arani\'e9no m\'e1rien. Lava yen pole camitas, came sa!\'94\
	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  T\'e1 h\'ednali n\'e1ner talaine senna, panieryan m\'e1ryat tesse ar hyamieryan tien, mal i hildor naityaner te. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Lava i h\'ednin tule, ar \'e1vate pusta tuliello ninna, an menelo aranie taitin n\'e1!\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar panyanes m\'e1ryat tesse ar oante talo.\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  The disciples said to him: \'93If it is so concerning husband and wife, marriage is not beneficial!\'94 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93All cannot receive the saying, but only [those] that have the gift. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  For there are some eunuchs [*
\f1\b viel\'f3rali
\f3\b0  = penis-less ones] that were born so from their mother's womb, and there are some eunuchs that were made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs that have have made themselves eunuchs for the good of the kingdom of heaven. Let [the one] that can receive it, receive it!\'94\
	
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Then children were being brought to him, for him to put his hands on them and for him to pray for them, but the disciples rebuked them. [
\f1\b Naitya
\f3\b0 - = abuse, put to shame.] 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  But Jesus said: \'93Let the children come, and do not stop them from coming to me, for the kingdom of heaven is for suchlike ones!\'94 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And he put his hands on them and went away from there.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! qu\'e9n t\'fale senna ar quente: \'93*Peantar, mana i m\'e1rie ya mauya nin care, camien oira coivie?\'94 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Quentes senna: \'93Manen n\'e1 i maqu\'e9tal n\'ed pa m\'e1rie? Ea er ye m\'e1ra n\'e1. Mal qui meril mene mir coivie, \'e1 himya i axani!\'94 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Quentes senna: \'93Mana nalte?\'94 Y\'e9sus hanquente: \'93\'c1valye nahta, \'e1valye pile, \'e1valye quete hurila *vettie, 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  alye anta alcar atarelyan ar amillelyan, ar mela armarolya ve imle!\'94 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  I nessa n\'e9r quente senna: \'93Ih\'edmien ilye axani sine; mana en penin?\'94 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Qui meril n\'e1ve ilvana, mena ar vaca armalyar ar \'e1tai anta i penyain, ar camuval harma menelde; t\'e1 tula ar \'e1ni hilya!\'94 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  \'cdre i nessa n\'e9r hlasse ta, oantes nairesse, an s\'e1mes rimbe armali.\
	
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus quente hildoryannar: \'93N\'e1sie qu\'e9tan lenna in urda nauva l\'e1ra quenen tule mir menelo aranie. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Ata qu\'e9tan lenna: Ulumpen menie ter nelmo assa n\'e1 anc\'e1rima epe tulie mir Eruo aranie l\'e1ra quenen!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 16
\f3\b0  And behold, one came to him and said: \'93Teacher, what is the good that it is necessary for me to do, in order to receive eternal life?\'94 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  He said to him: \'93How is [it] that you are asking me about goodness? There exists one whois good. But if you want to go into life, keep the commandments!\'94 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  He said to him: \'93What are they?\'94 Jesus answered: \'93You shall not kill, you shall not steal, you shall not speak a lying witness, 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  you shall give glory to your father and to your mother, and love your neighbour as yourself!\'94 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  The young man said to him: \'93I have kept all these commandments; what do I still lack?\'94 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  Jesus said to him: \'93If you want to be perfect, go and sell your goods and give them to the poor, and you will receive a treasure in heaven; then come and follow me!\'94 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  When the young man heard that, he went away in grief, for he had numerous goods.\
	
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  But Jesus said to his disciples: \'93Truly I say to you that it will be difficult for a rich person to come into the kingdom of heaven. 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  Again I say to you: For a camel to go through a needle's eye [
\f1\b assa
\f3\b0  = hole] is easier than coming into God's kingdom for a rich person.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  \'cdre i hildor hlasser ta, anelte qu\'e1tine t\'fara elmendanen, qu\'e9tala: \'93Man pole n\'e1ve rehtana?\'94 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Y\'e9tala te, Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Atanin nas \'fac\'e1rima, mal Erun ilye nati nar c\'e1rime!\'94\
	
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  T\'e1 P\'e9ter carampe, qu\'e9tala: \'93Y\'e9, ehehtielme ilqua ar ih\'edlier ly\'e9. Mana, nanwave, euva men?\'94 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lenna: I *enontiesse, \'edre i Atanyondo ham\'fava alcarinqua mahalmaryanna, elde i ih\'edlier ni y\'fa hamuvar mahalassen yunque, namila Isra\'e9lo nossi yunque. 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Ar ilquen ye oantie ho coar hya h\'e1nor hya n\'e9\uc0\u351 ar hya restar castanen essenyo, camuva rimbe l\'fali amba ar nauva aryon oira coivi\'e9no. 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Mal rimbali i nar minye nauvar m\'e9time, ar i m\'e9timar, minye.\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  When the disciples heart that, they wre filled with great wonder, saying: \'93Who can be saved?\'94 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  Looking at them, Jesus said: \'93To men it is impossible, but to God all things are possible!\'94\
	
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  Then Peter spoke, saying: \'93Behold, we have abandoned everything and have followed you. What, really, will there be for us?\'94 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  Jesus said to them: \'93Truly I say to you: In the resurrection, when the Son of Man shall sit down upon his glorious throne, you that have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging Israel's twelve tribes. 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  And everyone who has gone away from houses or brothers or sisters or fields by reason of my name, will receive many times more and will be heir to eternal life. 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  But numerous ones that are first will be last, and the last, first.\
\

\f0\i0\b RANTA 20 TATT\

\f2\b0 An menelo aranie n\'e1 ve n\'e9r, *coantur, ye etelende arinyave hirien *molindoli in poldes paitya molieltan tarwaryasse liantassion. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Apa carie v\'e9re as i *molindor pa er \ul len\'e1r\ulnone  i auren, mentanes te mir tarwarya. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Etelendes y\'fa *os i neldea l\'fame ar cenne exeli t\'e1ra pen molie m\'ed mancalen\'f3me, 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  ar quentes y\'fa t\'e9na: \'93Y\'fa elde, \'e1 lelya mir i tarwa, ar antauvan len ya faila n\'e1!\'94 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ar lendelte. Ata lendes ettenna *os i enquea ar i nertea l\'fame, ar carnes i imya nat. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Mal *os i minquea l\'fame lendes ettenna ar hirne exeli t\'e1ra, ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Manen n\'e1 i t\'e1ralde sisse i quanda aure pen molie?\'94 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Quentelte senna: \'93Pan *\'faquen ac\'e1rie v\'e9re aselme pa molie!\'94 Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mena i tarwanna liantassion, y\'fa elde!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 20
\f3\b0  \
For the kingdom of heaven is like a man, an householder, who went out early to find workers that he could pay for them to work in his garden of vines [= his vineyard]. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  After making an agreement [
\f1\b v\'e9re
\f3\b0 , compact] with the workers about one denarius for the [work of the] day, he sent them into his garden. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  He also went out around the third hour and saw some others stand without work in the market-place, 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  and he said to them as well: \'93You as well, go into the garden, and I shall give you what is just!\'94 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  And they went. Again he went out around the sixth and the ninth hour, and he did the same thing. 
\f1\b 6 
\f3\b0 But around the eleventh hour he went out and found some others standing, and he said to them: \'93How is [it] that you are standing here the whole day without working?\'94 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  They said to him: \'93Because nobody has made an agreement with us about working!\'94 He said to them: \'93Go to the garden of vines, you as well!\'94\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  \'cdre \uc0\u351 inye t\'fale, i *tarwantur quente *ortirnoryanna: Yala i *molindor ar \'e1 paitya tien *paityalelta, i m\'e9timallon i minyannar! 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  \'cdre i minquea l\'fameo neri t\'faler, ilquen mici te camne \ul len\'e1r\ulnone . 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Etta, \'edre i minyar t\'faler, intyanelte i camumnelte amba, mal ilquen mici t\'e9 y\'fa camne er \ul len\'e1r\ulnone . 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Apa camie sa nurrunelte i *tarwanturenna 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  ar quenter: \'93M\'e9timar sine om\'f3lier erya l\'fame, ananta antal tien i imya ya antal men i oc\'f3lier i aureo c\'f3lo ar i \'fare!\'94 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Mal hanquentasse quenenna mici te quentes: \'93M\'e1lo, ac\'e1rien munta \'fafaila lyen! \uc0\u350 \'e1quentel \'edre quenten in antauvanen lyen er \ul len\'e1r\ulnone , l\'e1? 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  \'c1 mapa ya *lyenya n\'e1 ar mena! Merin anta m\'e9tima sinan i imya ya antan lyen. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ma uan lerta care ya merin v\'e9re natinyain? Hya ma hendelya olca n\'e1 pan inye mane n\'e1? \
	Sie i m\'e9timar nauvar minye, ar i minyar m\'e9time!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 8
\f3\b0  When evening came, the master of the garden said to his overseer: Call the workers and pay them their payment, from the last ones to the first ones! 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  When the men of the eleventh hour came, everyone among them received a denarius. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  Therefore, when the first ones came, they supposed that they were going to receive more, but everyone among them also received one denarius. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  After receiving it they grumbled against the garden-master 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  and said: These last ones have worked a single hour, and yet you give them the same that you give to us that have carried the burden of the day and the heat! 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  But in answer to one among them he said: 'Fellow, I have done nothing unrighteous to you! You assented when I said that I was going to give you one denarius, no? 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  Take what is yours and go! I want to give this this last one the same that I give to you. May I not do what I want to my own things? Or is your eye wicked since I am good?\
	Thus the last ones will be first, and the first ones last!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  S\'ed, n\'f3 lendes ama Yer\'fasalemenna, Y\'e9sus tulyane i hildor yunque v\'e9ra n\'f3menna ar quente t\'e9na: 
\f0\b 18 
\f2\b0 \'93Y\'e9! Lelyuvalme ama Yer\'fasalemenna, ar i Atanyondo nauva antana olla i h\'e9re *airimoin ar i parmangolmoin, ar namuvaltes valda qualmeo 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  ar antauvaltes olla i n\'f3rin, lengieltan senna yaiwenen ar riptieltan se ar tarwestieltan se, ar i neldea auresse nauvas ortana!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 17
\f3\b0  Now, before he went up to Jerusalem, Jesus led the twelve disciples to a private place and said to them: \'93Behold! We will go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be given over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will judge him worthy of death 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  and will give him over to the nations, for them to behave towards him with scorn and for them to flay him and for them to crucify him, and on the third day he will be raised!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Severaio yondoron amil t\'fale senna as yondoryar, luhtala epe se ar arcala nat sello. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Mana meril?\'94 Isse quente senna: \'93Queta i yondonya atta sine haruvat, qu\'e9n ara formalya ar qu\'e9n ara hyarmalya, aranielyasse!\'94 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente: \'93Uaste ista ya arcaste! Ma l\'e9t polit suce i yulma ya inye sucuva?\'94 Quentette senna: \'93Polimme!\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'fana: \'93\'c9 sucuvaste yulmanya, mal harie ara formanya ar hyarmanya ua anna inye lerta anta; ta n\'e1 in nar manwane lo Atarinya!\'94\
	
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  \'cdre i exi quean hlasser pa si, anelte r\'fa\uc0\u351 ie i h\'e1no attanna. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus yalde te insenna ar quente: \'93Istalde i n\'f3rion turi turir tai, ar tauraltar samir t\'fare or te. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Mal ua ea sie mici elde, ono ye mere n\'e1ve t\'fara mici l\'e9, sen mauya n\'e1ve n\'farolda, 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  ar yen mere n\'e1ve minya mici le, sen mauya n\'e1ve m\'f3lelda 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  \'96 ve y\'fa i Atanyondo ua t\'fale n\'e1ven *veuyaina, mal *vevien ar antaven cuilerya ve *nanwere quaptalesse rimbaiva!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b 	20
\f3\b0  Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee [Severai] came to him with her sons, bowing before him and requesting something of him. 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  Jesus said to her: \'93What do you want?\'94 She said to him: \'93Say that these two sons of mine will sit, one by your right hand and one by your left hand, in your kingdom!\'94 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said: \'93You [dual] do not know what you request! Are \ul you\ulnone  able to drink the cup that I will drink?\'94 They said to him: \'93We [dual excl.] are able!\'94 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  He said to them:  \'93You will indeed drink my cup, but sitting by my right hand and my left hand is not a gift \ul I\ulnone  may give; that is for those that are prepared by my Father!\'94\
	
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  When the ten others heard about this, they were angry with [-
\f1\b nna
\f3\b0  'at'] the two brothers. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  But Jesus called them to himself and said: \'93You know the rulers of the nations rule them, and their mighty ones have power over them. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  But it is not so among you, but [the one] who wants to be great among you, for him it is necessary to be your slave 
\f1\b 38
\f3\b0  \'96 like also the Son of Man did not come to be served, but in order to serve and to give his life as a ransom in exchange of many!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 29 
\f2\b0 S\'ed, \'edre lendelte et Yericollo hoa \uc0\u351 anga hilyane se. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! lacen\'edte n\'e9r atta h\'e1manet ara i malle. \'cdre hlassette i Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne i qu\'e9n lahtala, y\'e1mette qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, \'f3rava metse, Lavirion!\'94 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Mal i \uc0\u351 anga carampe t\'fana tulcave, n\'e1vettan quilde; ananta y\'e1mette i ambe: \'93Heru, \'f3rava metse, Lavirion!\'94 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus pustane, yalde tu ar quente: \'93Mana meriste i caruvan lent?\'94 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Quentette senna: \'93Heru, nai hendummat nauvat pantaine!\'94 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  \'c1paina endaryanna, Y\'e9sus appane henduttat \'96 ar mi yana l\'fa ence tunt cene, ar hilyanettes.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 29
\f3\b0  Now, when they went out of Jericho a great crowd followed him. And behold! two blind men were sitting by the road. When they heard that Jesus was the person passing by, they cried saying: \'93Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!\'94 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  But the crowd spoke firmly to them, for them to be silent; and yet they cried the more: \'93Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!\'94 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  And Jesus stopped, called them and said: \'93What do you wish that I will do for you?\'94 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  They said to him: \'93Lord, may our eyes be opened!\'94 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  Being touched to his heart, Jesus touched their eyes \'96 and in the same moment it was possible for them to see, and they followed him.\

\f0\i0\b \
RANTA 21\

\f2\b0 \'cdre t\'falelte hare Yer\'fasalemenna ar t\'faler Vet-Fahenna i Orontenna *Milloaldaron, t\'e1 Y\'e9sus etementane hildo atta, qu\'e9tala t\'fana: \'93Mena mir i osto ya caita epe tu, ar lintave hiruvaste *pellope n\'fatina, ar *rocolle \'f3se; \'e1tu lehta ar \'e1tu tulya ninna. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar qui qu\'e9n quete *aiqua lenta, queta: I Heru same maure t\'fava. T\'e1, mi imya l\'fa, mentauvas tu!\'94\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Nat sina martane carien anwa i quetta ya i Eruterc\'e1no quente: 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  \'93Nyara Siono selyen: Y\'e9, aranelya t\'fala lyenna, nalda ar h\'e1mala *pellopesse, ar *rocollesse, onna celvo c\'f3lova!\'94\

\f3\i \

\f1\b CHAPTER 21 \

\f3\b0 When they came near to Jerusalem and came to Bethphage to the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent forth two disciples, saying to them: \'93Go into the city that lies before you, and quickly you will find a donkey bound, and a colt with it; loose them [
\f1\b tu
\f3\b0 , dual] and lead them to me. And if somebody says anything to you, say: The Lord has need of them [
\f1\b t\'fa-va
\f3\b0  them-of]. Then, in the same moment, he will send them!\'94\
	
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  This thing happened to make true the word which the prophet spoke: \'93Tell the daughter of Zion: Behold, your king is coming to you, lowly and sitting on a donkey and on a cold, offspring of a beast of burden!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Sie i hildor lender ar carner ve Y\'e9sus canne tun. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar tulunette i *pellope ar *rocollerya, ar panyanette tusse collattar, ar hamnes tusse. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  I ambe hoa ranta i \uc0\u351 ango pantaner collaltar i mallesse, \'edre exeli hocirner olvali i aldallon ar pantaner tai i mallesse. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar i \uc0\u351 angar yar lender epe se ar i hilyaner y\'e1mer: \'93\ul Hosanna\ulnone  yondon Laviro! Aistana n\'e1 ye t\'fala i Heruo essenen!  \ul Hosanna\ulnone  i tarmenissen!\'94 \
	
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre lendes mir Yer\'fasalem, i quanda osto n\'e1ne valtana, qu\'e9tala: \'93Man n\'e1 quen sina?\'94 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Mal i \uc0\u351 angar hanquenter: \'93Si n\'e1 Y\'e9sus i Eruterc\'e1no, Nasaretello Alileasse!\'94\
	
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus lende mir i corda, ar et-hantes ilye i vancer ar *homancaner i cordasse, ar sarnor i *telpevistandoiva nuquernes, ar i hammar iva vancer i cucuar. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93N\'e1 t\'e9cina: Coanya nauva estaina coa hyami\'e9va \'96 mal elde ac\'e1rier sa rotto piluiva!\'94 \
\
	
\f1\i\b 6
\f3\b0  Thus the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  And they [dual] brought the donkey and its colt, and they put on them [dual] their cloaks, and he sat upon them. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  The greater part of the crown spread out their cloaks on the road, while others cut off branches from the trees and spread them out in the road. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And the crowds that went before him and the ones that followed cried: \'93Hosanna for the son of David! Blessed is [he] who is coming in the Lord's name! Hosanna in the highest places!\'94\
	
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And when he went into Jerusalem, the entire city was exited, saying: \'93Who is this person?\'94 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  But the crowds answered: \'93This is Jesus the Prophet, from Nazareth in Galilee!\'94\
	
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  And Jesus went into the temple, and he threw out all that sold and bought in the temple, and the tables of the money-changers he overturned, and the chairs of [those] that sold the doves. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  And he said to them: \'93It is written: My house will be called a house of prayer \'96 but you have made it a cave of robbers!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ente, lacen\'edti ar *lalev\'edti queneli t\'faler senna i cordasse, ar nestanes te.\
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  \'cdre i h\'e9re *airimor ar i parmangolmor cenner i elmendar yar carnes ar i seldor y\'e1mala i cordasse: \'93\ul Hosianna\ulnone  Yondon Laviro!\'94, anelte r\'fa\uc0\u351 ie 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  ar quenter senna: \'93Ma hl\'e1ral ya t\'e9 qu\'e9tar?\'94 Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93N\'e1! Ma ualde oi hentane si: Et antollo lapsion ar vinimoron amanwiel laitale \'96 ?\'94 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Ar oantes tello ar lende et i ostollo Vetanianna ar lemne tasse ter i l\'f3me. \
	
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Nanw\'e9nala i cordanna arinyave, anes maita. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ar cennes *rely\'e1valda ara i malle ar lende senna, mal hirnes munta sesse hequa rie lasseli, ar quentes senna: \'93Nai *\'faquen oi camuva y\'e1ve lyello!\'94 Ar mi imya l\'fa i *rely\'e1valda hestane. 
\f0\b 20 
\f2\b0 Mal \'edre i hildor cenner ta, anelte elmendasse, qu\'e9tala: \'93Manen i *rely\'e1valda hestane mi erya l\'fa?\'94 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lenna: Qui samilde savie ar uar iltance, ualde rie caruva ya inye carne i *rely\'e1valdan, mal y\'fa qui quetilde oron sinanna: Na ortana ar h\'e1tina mir i ear!, ta martuva. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Ar ilye i nati yar arcalde hyamiesse, arwe savi\'e9no, camuvalde!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 14
\f3\b0  Furthermore, blind and lame people came to him in the temple, and he healed them.\
	
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  When the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonders that he did and the boys crying in the temple: \'93Hosianna to the Son of David,\'94 they were angry 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  and said to him: \'93Are you hearing what they are saying?\'94 Jesus said to them: \'93Yes! Did you not ever read this: From the mouth of babes and babies you have prepared praise \'96 ? 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  And he went away from them and went out of the city and remained there through the night.\
	
\f1\b 18 
\f3\b0 Returning to the temple early, he was hungry. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  And he saw a fig tree beside the road and went to it, but he found nothing on it except only some leaves, and he said to it: \'93May nobody ever receive fruit from you!\'94 And in the same moment the fig tree withered. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  But when the disciples saw that, they were in wonder, saying: \'93How did the fig tree wither in a single moment?\'94 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said to them: \'93Truly I say to you: If you have faith and are not uncertain, you will not do only what I did to the fig tree, but also if you say to this mountain: Be lifted and thrown into the sea!, that will happen. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  And all the things that you request in prayer, having faith, you will receive!\'94\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  S\'ed apa lendes mir i corda, i h\'e9re *airimor ar i amy\'e1rar im\'edca i lie t\'faler senna \'edre peantanes i \uc0\u351 anga ar quenter: \'93Mana i h\'e9re yanen caril nati sine? Ar man antane lyen h\'e9re sina?\'94 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  Hanquentesse Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Y\'fa inye maquetuva lenna pa er nat. Qui nyarilde nin, y\'fa inye nyaruva len pa i h\'e9re yanen carin nati sine. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Yoh\'e1no sumbie, mallo anes? Menello hya atanillon?\'94 Mal carnelte \'favie mici inte, qu\'e9tala: \'93Qui quetilve: Menello, quetuvas venna: T\'e1 manen n\'e1 i ualde s\'e1ve sesse? 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Mal qui quetilve: Atanillon, rucuvalve i \uc0\u351 angallo, an illi mici te savir i Yoh\'e1no n\'e1ne Eruterc\'e1no!\'94 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Ar hanquentasse quentelte Y\'e9sunna: \'93Ualme ista!\'94 Y\'fa isse quente t\'e9na: \'93T\'e1 inye v\'e9la ua nyare len pa i h\'e9re yanen carin nati sine. \
\

\f1\i\b 23
\f3\b0  Now after he went into the temple, the chief priests and the elders among the people came to him while he was teaching the crowd and said: \'93What is the authority by which you do these things? And who gave you this authority?\'94 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said to them: \'93I as well will ask you about one thing. If you tell me, I too will tell you about the authority with which I do these things. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  John's baptism, where was it from? From heaven or from men?\'94 But they made a consideration among themselves, saying: \'93If we say: From heaven, he will say to us: Then how is [it] that you did not believe in him? 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  But if we say: From men, we will [have to] fear the crowd, for all mong them beliee that John was a prophet!\'94 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  And in answer they said to Jesus: \'93We do not know!\'94 He as well said to them: \'93Then I alike do not tell you about the authority with which I do these things!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Mal mana sanalde? Enge n\'e9r as h\'edna atta. Lendes i minyanna ar quente: H\'edna, s\'edra mola i tarwasse liantassion! 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  H\'e9 quente: M\'e9nan, heru! \'96 mal uas lende. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Lelyala i exenna, quentes i imya nat. Mal hanquentasse h\'e9 quente: Uan mere. Ono epeta vistanes s\'e1marya ar lende. 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Man im\'edca i atta carne i ataro nirme?\'94 Quentelte: \'93I attea!\'94 Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lenna: I *tungwemor ar i *imbacindi lelyar epe l\'e9 mir Eruo aranie. 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  An Yoh\'e1no t\'fale lenna m\'ed malle faili\'e9va, mal ualde s\'e1ver sesse. Mal i *tungwemor ar i *imbacindi s\'e1ver sesse, ar elde, \'f3mu cennelde ta, uar epeta vistane s\'e1malda savien sesse.\
\

\f1\i\b 28
\f3\b0  But what do you think? [There] was a man with two children. He went to the first one and said: Child, today work in the garden of wines! 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  He said: I am going, lord! \'96 but he did not go. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  Going to the other, he said the same thing. But in answer he said: I do not want to. But afterwards he changed his mind and went. 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  Who among the two did the father's will?\'94 They said: \'93The second one!\'94 Jesus said to them: \'93Truly I say to you: The tax collectors and the harlots go before you into God's kingdom. 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  For John came to you in the way of righteousness, but you did not believe in him. But the tax collectors and the harlots believed in him, and you, though you saw that, did not afterwards change your mind so as to believe in him.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Hlara hyana sestie: Enge n\'e9r, *coantur, ye empanne tarwa liantassion, pelde sa pelonen, sampe *limpevorma ar carastane mindo. T\'e1 l\'e1ves *alam\'f3lin *yuhta sa telpen, ar lende ettelea n\'f3renna. 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  \'cdre i l\'fame y\'e1viva t\'fale, mentanes n\'faroryar \'f1etien y\'e1veryar. 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  Mal i *alamor namper n\'faroryar, ar er palpanelte, exe nacantelte, exenna hantelte sarni tenna qualles. 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  Ata mentanes hyane n\'faroli, rimbe epe i minyar, mal carnelte i imya tien. 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  I mettasse mentanes yondorya t\'e9na, qu\'e9tala: \'93Samuvalte \'e1ya yondonyan!\'94 
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  C\'e9nala i yondo, i *alamor quenter mici inte: \'93Si i aryon n\'e1; tula, alve nahta se ar \'f1ete *aryonierya!\'94 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  Ar m\'e1pala se, hanteltes et i tarwallo ar nacanter se. 
\f0\b 40
\f2\b0  Etta, \'edre i *tarwantur tuluva, mana caruvas sine *alamoin?\'94 \
\

\f1\i\b 	33
\f3\b0  Hear another comparison: There was a man, a householder, who planted a garden of vines [a vineyard], surrounded it with a fence, dug a wine-press and built a tower. Then he let some cultivators use it for money, and went to foreign country. 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  When the time of fruits came, he sent his servants to get his fruits. 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  But the cultivators took his servants, and one they beat up, another they slew, on another they threw stones until he died. 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  Again he sent other servants, more numerous than the first ones, but they did the same to them. 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  In the end he sent his son to them, saying: \'93They will have awe for my son!\'94 
\f1\b 38
\f3\b0  Seeing the son, the cultivators said among themselves: \'93This is the heir; come, let us kill him and get his inheritance!\'94 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  And seizing him, they threw him out of the garden and killed him. 
\f1\b 40
\f3\b0  Therefore, when the garden-master shall come, what will he do to these cultivators?\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  Quentelte: \'93Sine ulcain antauvas ulca metta, ar lavuvas hyane *alamoin *yuhta i tarwa, i antauvar sen i y\'e1vi \'edre i l\'fame ut\'falie!\'94 
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Lau hentanelde i tehtelessen: I ondo ya i \uc0\u351 amnor querner oa, s\'e1 ol\'f3lie cas i vinco. I H\'e9rullo si ut\'falie, ar nas elmenda hendulmatse \'96 ? 
\f0\b 43
\f2\b0  Etta quetin lenna: Eruo aranie nauva mapana oa lello ar antana n\'f3ren c\'e1rala y\'e1veryar. 
\f0\b 44
\f2\b0  Ar ye lanta ondo sinanna nauva r\'e1cina; mal aiquen yenna lantas \'96 aqua ascatuvas se. \
	
\f0\b 45
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre i h\'e9re *airimor ar i Farisar hlasser sestieryar, sintelte i quentes pa t\'e9, 
\f0\b 46
\f2\b0  ar \'f3mu cestanelte mapa se runcelte i \uc0\u351 angallo, pan sannelte pa se ve Eruterc\'e1no.\
\

\f1\i\b 41
\f3\b0  They said: \'93To these evil ones he will give an evil end, and he will let other cultivators use the garden, [some] that will give him the fruits when the time has come!\'94 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  Jesus said to them: \'93Have you really not read in the scriptures: The rock which the builders turned away, \ul it\ulnone  has become head of the corner. From the Lord this has come, and it is a wonder in our eyes \'96 ? 
\f1\b 43
\f3\b0  Therefore I say to you: The Kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a nation making its fruits. 
\f1\b 44
\f3\b0  And who falls upon this rock will be broken, but whoever it falls upon \'96 it will completely break him asunder.\
	
\f1\b 45
\f3\b0  And when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his comparisons, they knew that he spoke about them, 
\f1\b 46
\f3\b0  and though they sought to seize him they feared the crowd, since they thought of him as a prophet.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 22 \

\f2\b0 Ar hanquentasse Y\'e9sus ata carampe t\'e9na sestielissen, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  \'93Menelo aranie n\'e1 ve n\'e9r, aran, ye carne veryangweo meren yondoryan. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ar mentanes n\'faroryar yalien i n\'e1ner y\'e1line i veryangweo merendenna, mal ualte merne tule. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ata mentanes hyane n\'faroli, qu\'e9tala: Nyara i y\'e1linain: 'Y\'e9, amanwien mattinya, mundonyar ar maitane celvanyar anaier nahtane, ar ilqua manwa n\'e1! Tula i veryangweo merendenna!' 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Mal ualte cimne ar oanter, qu\'e9n v\'e9ra restaryanna, qu\'e9n mancaleryanna; 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  mal i exi, m\'e1pala n\'faroryar, lenganer tien yaiwenen ar nacanter te.\

\f0\b \

\f1\i CHAPTER 22\

\f3\b0 And in answer Jesus again spoke to them in comparisons, saying: 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  \'93The kingdom of heaven is like a man, a king, who made a feast of marriage for his son. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  And he sent his servants to call those that were called to the feast of marriage, but they did not want to come. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  Again he sent other servants, saying: Tell the ones invited: 'Behold, I have prepared my meal, my bulls and my fattened animals have been slaughtered, and everything is ready! Come to the feast of marriage!' But they did not give heed and went off, one to his own field, one to his business; 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  but the others, seizing his servants, behaved towards them with scorn and killed them. \

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Mal i aran olle r\'fa\uc0\u351 ea, ar mentanes hosseryar ar nancarne tane *nahtari ar urtane ostolta. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  T\'e1 quentes n\'faroryannar: I veryangweo meren \'e9 manwa n\'e1, mal i y\'e1linar \'faner valde. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Etta mena i mallennar yar tulyar et i ostollo, ar yala aiquen ye hirilde i veryangweo merendenna. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar n\'faror sine etelender ar comyaner illi i hirnelte, olcar ar mani v\'e9la, ar i \uc0\u351 ambe yasse carnelte i veryangweo meren n\'e1ne qu\'e1tina inen cainer ara i sarno. \
\
	
\f1\i\b 7 
\f3\b0 But the king became angry, and he sent his armies and destroyed those murderers and burnt their city. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Then he said to his servants: The feast of marriage is indeed ready, but the ones called were not worthy. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Therefore go to the roads that lead out of the city, and call anyone that you find to the feast of marriage. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And these servants went out and gathered all that they found, wicked ones and good ones alike, and the room in which they made the feast of marriage was filled by those that lay at the table.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  \'cdre i aran t\'fale minna y\'e9tien i caitalar ara i sarno, cennes n\'e9r ye \'fane netyana lanninen veryangweo. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ar quentes senna: \'93M\'e1lo, manen t\'falel minna sir \'fa lannion veryangweo?\'94 S\'e1mes munta ya poldes quete. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i aran quente n\'faroryannar: '\'c1se nute talusse ar m\'e1tse ar \'e1se et-hate mir i mornie i ettesse; tasse nauvar i yaime ar i mulie nelciva.' 
\f0\b 14 
\f2\b0 An rimbar nar y\'e1line, mal mancar nar c\'edline!\
\
	
\f1\i\b 11
\f3\b0  When the king came in to look at the ones lying at the table, he saw a man who was not adorned in clothes of marriage. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  And he said to him: \'93Friend, how did you come in here without clothes of marriage?\'94 He had nothing that he could say. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Then the king said to his servants: Bind him on feet and hands and throw him out into the darkness on the outside; there will be the wailing and the grinding of teeth.' 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  For numerous ones are called, but few are chosen!\'94\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i Farisar lender ar carner panoli uo, rembien se questaryasse. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Ar mentanelte senna hildoltar as i Herolyar, i quenter: \'93*Peantar, istalme i nalye nanwa ar peanta Eruo malle nanwiesse, ar ualye cime aiquen, an ual y\'e9ta Atanion cendele. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Etta queta menna ya sanalye: Ma n\'e1 l\'e1vaina anta *tungwe i Ingaranen, hya l\'e1?\'94
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus, istala ulculta, quente: \'93Manen n\'e1 i tyastalde ni, *imnetyandor? 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  \'c1nin tana telpemitta i *tungweo!\'94 Tulunelte senna \ul len\'e1r\ulnone . Ar quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mano emma ar tecie n\'e1 si?\'94 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Quentelte: \'93I Ingarano!\'94 T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93Etta \'e1 paitya i Ingarano nati i Ingaranen, mal Eruo nati Erun!\'94 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre hlasselte ta, anelte elmendasse, ar autala sello lendelte oa.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 15
\f3\b0  Then the Pharisees went and made plans together, to trap him in his speech. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  And they sent to him their disciples with the Herodians, that said: \'93Teacher, we know that you are true and teach God's way in truth, and you do not give heed to anyone [in particular], for you do not look at the face of Men. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Therefore say to us what you think: Is it allowed to give tax to the High King, or not? 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  But Jesus, knowing their evil, said: \'93How is [it] that you test me, hypocrites? 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Show me a silver-piece of the tax!\'94 They brought to him a denarius. And he said to them: \'93Whose picture and writing is this?\'94 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  They said: \'93The High King's!\'94 Then he said to them: \'93Therefore pay the High King's things to the High King, but God's things to God!\'94 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  And when they heard that, they were in wonder, and going away from him they went off.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Yana auresse t\'faler senna Sanduce\'e1li, i quetir i l\'e1 ea enortie, ar maquentelte senna: 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  \'93*Peantar, M\'f3ses quente: Qui aiquen quale \'fa h\'ednion, mauya h\'e1noryan verya veriryanna ar orta erde h\'e1noryan. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Enger aselte h\'e1nor otso, ar i minya, apa veryanes nissenna, qualle; ar pan pennes h\'edna, hehtanes verirya h\'e1noryan. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  I imya nat martane y\'fa i attean ar i neldean, \'e9 tenna i ostean. 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ve i m\'e9tima i n\'eds qualle. 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  T\'e1 man se-samuvas ve veri i enortiesse? An illi mici te s\'e1mer se!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 23
\f3\b0  In that day [there] came to him some Sadducees, that say that [there] is no resurrection, and they asked him: 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  \'93Teacher, Moses said: If anyone dies without children, it is necessary for his brother to marry his wife and raise up seed to his brother. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  [There] were with us seven brothers, and the first, after he got married to a woman, died; and since he lacked [any] child, he left his wife for his brother. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  The same thing happened also to the second and to the third, indeed until the seventh. 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  As the last the woman died. 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  Then who will have her as wife in the resurrection? For all among them had her!\'94\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Loitalde, pan ualde ista i Tehteler ar Eruo t\'fare v\'e9la. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  An i enortiesse ualte verya exennar hya nar vertane, mal nalte ve menelo vali. 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Mal pa i enortie qualinaron, ma ualte hentane ya n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina lenna lo Eru, \'edre quentes: 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Inye Avrah\'e1mo Aino ar \'cdsaco Aino ar Y\'e1covo Aino \'96 ? Uas qualinaron Aino, mal coirearon!\'94 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Hl\'e1rala ta, i \uc0\u351 angar n\'e1ner qu\'e1tine elmendanen peantieryanen.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 29
\f3\b0  In answer Jesus said to them: \'93You err, since you do not know the Scriptures and God's power alike. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  For in the resurrection they do not get married to others or are married off, but they are like the angels of heaven. 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  But concerning the resurrection [or, re-rising] of the dead, did you not read what was said to you by God, when he said: 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  I [am] Abraham's God and Isaac's God and Jacob's God  \'96 ? He is not the God of dead ones, but of living ones!\'94 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  Hearing that, the crowds were filled with wonder at [-
\f1\b nen
\f3\b0 ] his teaching.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  \'cdre i Farisar hlasser manen pustanes anto i Sand\'facearon, ocomnelte uo. 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  Ar qu\'e9n im\'edca te, *\uc0\u351 anyengolmo, maquente tyastien se: 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  \'93*Peantar, mana i ant\'fara axan i \uc0\u350 anyesse?\'94 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  Quentes senna: \'93Alye mele i H\'e9ru Ainolya quanda endalyanen ar quanda fealyanen ar quanda s\'e1malyanen. 
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  Ta n\'e1 i ant\'fara ar minya axan. 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  I attea v\'e1vea n\'e1: Alye mele armarolya ve imle. 
\f0\b 40
\f2\b0  Sine n\'e1t i axan atta yanten i quanda \uc0\u350 anye linga, ar i Eruterc\'e1nor!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 34
\f3\b0  When the Pharisees heard how he stopped the mouth of the Sadducees, they gathered together. 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  And one among them, a lawyer, asked to test him: 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  \'93Teacher, what is the greatest commandment in the Law?\'94 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  He said to him: \'93'You shall love the Lord your God with your whole heart and your whole soul and your whole mind.' That is the greatest and first commandment. 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  The second one is similar: You shall love your neighbor as yourself. 
\f1\b 40
\f3\b0  These are [dual] the two commandments by which [-
\f1\b nten
\f3\b0 , dual instrumental] the entire Law hangs, and the Prophets!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  S\'ed lan i Farisar aner comyane Y\'e9sus maquente t\'e9na: 
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  \'93Mana sanalde pa i Hristo? Mano yondo n\'e1se?\'94 Quentelte senna: \'93Laviro!\'94 
\f0\b 43
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Manen, t\'e1, lerta Lavir i Fairenen esta se Heru, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 44
\f2\b0  I H\'e9ru quente herunyanna: Hara ara formanya tenna panyan \'f1ottolyar nu talulyat \'96 ? 
\f0\b 45
\f2\b0  Qui, t\'e1, Lavir esta se Heru, manen n\'e1se yondorya?\'94 
\f0\b 46
\f2\b0  Ar ence \'faquenen hanquete senna erya quetta; ente, l\'e1 enge aiquen ye veryane maquete senna ambe.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 41
\f3\b0  Now while the Pharisees were gathered Jesus said to them: 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  \'93What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?\'94 They said to him: \'93David's!\'94 
\f1\b 43
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93How, then, may David by the Spirit call him Lord, saying: 
\f1\b 44
\f3\b0  The Lord said to my lord: Sit by my right hand until I place your enemies under your feet'\'96 ? 
\f1\b 45
\f3\b0  If, then, David calls him Lord, how is he his son?\'94 
\f1\b 46
\f3\b0  And nobody was able to say to him a single word; furthermore, [there] was not anyone who dared to ask him [anything] [any]more.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 23\

\f2\b0 T\'e1 Y\'e9sus carampe i \uc0\u351 angannar ar i hildonnar, qu\'e9tala: 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  \'93I parmangolmor ar Farisar h\'e1rar M\'f3seo hammasse. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Etta \'e1 care ar himya ilye i nati yar nyarilte len, mal \'e1va care ve cardaltar, an quetiltes, mal uar care. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Nutilte lunge c\'f3lar ar panyar tai quenion pontesse, mal t\'e9 uar mere appa tai lepereltanen. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Ilye carieltar carilte n\'e1ven c\'e9nine lo atani, an carilte *colcalleltar palle ar laniltar hoe. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Melilte same i amminde n\'f3mi mattissen ar i minye hammar i *yomencoassen, 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  ar came *suilier i mancalen\'f3messen ar n\'e1ve estaina Ravi lo atani. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Mal elde, \'e1va lave aiquenen esta le Ravi, an er n\'e1 *peantarelda, mal illi mici l\'e9 nar h\'e1nor.\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 23\

\f3\b0 Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to the disciples, saying: 
\f1\b 2 
\f3\b0 \'93The scribes and the Pharisees are sitting on the chair of Moses. 
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  Therefore do and keep all the things that they tell you, but to do do according to their deeds, for they say it, but do not perform. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  They bind heavy burdens and put them on people's back, but \ul they\ulnone  do not wish to touch them with their finger. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  All their doings they do in order to be seen by men, for they make their phylacteries [*
\f1\b colcaller
\f3\b0 , little boxes] broad and their fringes broad. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  They love to have the most prominent places at meals and the first seats in the synagogues, 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  and to receive greetings in the market-places and to be called Rabbi by men. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  But you, do not allow anyone to call you Rabbi, for one is your teacher, but all among you are brothers.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ente, \'e1va esta aiquen cemende atarelda, an samilde erya Atar, i meneldea. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar \'e1va na estaine *tulyandor, an samilde erya *Tulyando, i Hristo. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Mal yen n\'e1 i ant\'fara mici le mauya n\'e1ve n\'farolda. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ye orta inse nauva nucumna, ar ye nucumne inse nauva ortaina. \
	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor! An holtalde Eruo aranie epe Atani, an elde uar lelya minna, ar i lelyar minna pustalde! [
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0 ]\
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor! An lelyalde olla ear yo nor querien erya qu\'e9n savieldanna, ar \'edre ac\'e1mies sa, carildes valda Ehennan l\'fa atta ambe epe l\'e9.\
\

\f1\i\b 9
\f3\b0  Furthermore, do not call anyone on earth your father, for you have a single Father, the heavenly one. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And do not be called leaders, for you have a single Leader, the Christ. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  But for [the one] who is the greatest among you it is necessary to be your servant. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  [The one] who exalts himself will be humbled, and [the one] that humbles himself will be exalted. \
	
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you close God's kingdom before Men, for you do not go inside, and [the ones] that go inside you stop! [
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0 ]\
	
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you travel across sea and land to turn a single person to your faith, and when he has received it, you make him worthy of [-
\f1\b n
\f3\b0 ] Gehenna two times more than you. \

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Horro len, *c\'e9nel\'f3re *tulyandor, i quetir: 'Qui aiquen anta vandarya i cordanen, ta n\'e1 munta, mal qui aiquen anta vandarya i cordo maltanen, n\'e1se nauta.' 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Aucor ar *c\'e9nel\'f3rar! An mana i ambe t\'fara, i malta hya i corda ya airita i malta? 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Yando quetilde: 'Qui aiquen anta vandarya i *yangwanen, ta n\'e1 munta; mal qui aiquen anta vandarya i annanen sasse, n\'e1se nauta.' 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  *C\'e9nel\'f3rar! An mana i ambe tura, i anna hya i *yangwa ya airita i anna? 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Etta ye anta vandarya i *yangwanen care sie s\'e1nen ar ilye i natinen sasse, 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  ar ye anta vandarya i cordanen care sie s\'e1nen ar s\'e9nen ye mare sasse, 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  ar ye anta vandarya menelden care sie Eruo mahalmanen ar yenen h\'e1ra sasse!
\f0\b  \
	\
	
\f1\i 16
\f3\b0  Woe to you, blind leaders, that say: 'If anyone gives his oath by the temple, that is nothing, but if anyone gives his oath by the gold of the temple, he is obliged.' 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Fools and blind ones! For what is the greater, the gold or the temple that hallows the gold? 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  Also you say: 'If anyone gives his oath by the altar, that is nothing, but if anyone gives his oath by the gift on it, he is obliged.' 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Blind ones! For what is the greater, the gift or the altar that hallows the gift? 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  Therefore [the one] who gives his oath by the altar does so by it and by all the things on it, 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  and [the one] who gives his oath by the temple does so by it and by he that dwells in it, 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  and [the one] who gives his oath by heaven [
\f1\b menel-nen
\f3\b0  > 
\f1\b menelden
\f3\b0 ] does so by God's throne and by [the one] who is sitting on it!\

\f0\i0\b \
23
\f2\b0  Horro len, parmagolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor! An antalde i quaista i \ul minto\ulnone  ar i \ul lillo\ulnone  ar i  \ul c\'famino\ulnone , mal ehehtielde i ambe valdie nati i \uc0\u350 anyesse: failie ar \'f3ravie ar voronwie. Mauyane care nati sine, ananta l\'e1 hehta i exi. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  *C\'e9nel\'f3rar, i *saltar i p\'ed, mal ammatir i ulumpe!\
	
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor, an poitalde ette i yulmo ar i veneo, mal i mityasse nalte quante pilweo ar peni\'e9no *immoturi\'e9va. 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  *C\'e9nel\'f3ra Farisa, \'e1 poita minyave i mitya i yulmo ar i veneo, yando etteryo n\'e1ven poica! \
\

\f1\i\b 23
\f3\b0  Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you give the tenth of i mint and the dill and the cumin, but you have abandoned the more important things in the Law: justice and mercy and faithfulness. It was necessary to do these things, and yet not abandon the others. 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  Blind ones, that strain out the gnat [
\f1\b p\'ed
\f3\b0 : small insect], but devour the camel!\
	
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you cleans [the] outside of the cup and the dish, but on the inside they are full of plunder and lack of self-control. 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  Blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and the dish, for its outside to be clean as well! \
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor, an nalde ve ninquinte sapsar, yar \'e9 *\uc0\u351 \'e9yar vanye i ettesse, mal i mityasse nalte quante axoinen qualinion ar ilya nostal\'e9nen \'fapoiti\'e9va. 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Mi sana l\'e9 yando elde i ettesse nemir faile atanin, mal i mityasse nalde quante *imnetyaleo ar *\uc0\u351 anyel\'f3ri\'e9no.\
	
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Horro len, parmangolmor ar Farisar, *imnetyandor, an caraste i *Eruterc\'e1noron sapsar ar netyar i failaron noiri, 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  ar quetilde: \'93Qui engelve auressen atarilvaron, ualve s\'e1me ranta aselte i *Eruterc\'e1noron sercesse!\'94 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Sie *vettalde indenna i nalde yondor ion nacanter i *Eruterc\'e1nor! 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Yando elde, t\'e1, quata atarildaron lesta! \
\
	
\f1\i\b 27 
\f3\b0 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you are like whitened graves, which indeed seem beautiful on the outside, but on the inside they are full of bones of dead ones and every kind of uncleanness. 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  In that manner you as well on the outside seem just to men, but on the inside you are full of hypocricy and lawlessness.\
	
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you build the graves of the Prophets and adorn the tombs of the just, 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  and you say: \'93If we existed in our father's days, we did not have [any] part with them in the blood of the Prophets!\'94 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  Thus you witness against yourselves that you are sons of [the ones] that killed the Prophets! 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  You too, then, fill your fathers' measure!\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Leucar, vembion h\'edn, manen u\uc0\u351 uvalde Ehenno n\'e1miello? 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  Etta, y\'e9! inye mentea lenna *Eruterc\'e1noli ar sailali ar parmangolmoli. Queneli mici te nahtuvalde ar tarwestuvalde, ar queneli mici te riptuvalde *yomencoaldassen ar roituvaldet ostollo ostonna, 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  ar sie tuluva lenna ilya faila serce *etulyana cemende, sercello faila Avelo sercenna Sacar\'edo Varaciaion, ye nacantelde imbi i y\'e1na ar i *yangwa. 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna: Ilye nati sine tuluvar *n\'f3nare sinanna!\
	
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  Yer\'fasalem, Yer\'fasalem, ye nahta i *Eruterc\'e1nor ar *sarya i nar mentaine senna \'96 manen rimbave mernen comya h\'ednalyar, ve poroce comya nessaryar nu r\'e1maryat! Mal ualde merne. 
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  Y\'e9! Coalda n\'e1 len hehtana! 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  An quetin lenna: Ho s\'ed ualde ni-cenuva tenna quetuvalde: Aistana n\'e1 ye t\'fala i H\'e9ruo essenen!\'94  \
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  Serpents, brood of worms, how will you escape from the judgment of Gehenna? 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  Therefore, behold! I am sending to you prophets and wise ones and scribes. Some among them you will kill and you will crucify, and some among them you will flay in your synagogues and you will pursue them from city to city, 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  and so there will come upon you all righteous blood poured forth on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Barakiah, whom you slew between the sanctuary and the altar. 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you: All these things will come upon this generation!\
	
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  Jerusalem, Jerusalem, [she] that slays the prophets and stones those that are sent to her \'96 how frequently I wished to gather your children, as a hen gathers her young under her wings [dual]! But you did not want to. 
\f1\b 38
\f3\b0  Behold! Your house is left to you! 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  And I say to you: From now you will not see me until you say: 'Blessed is he that is coming in the name of the Lord.'\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 24 \

\f2\b0 Autala, Yesus lende oa, mal hildoryar t\'faler senna tanien sen i cordo ataqui. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse quentes t\'e9na: \'93Ma ualde cene ilye sine nati? N\'e1sie quetin lenna: Sisse ondo laume lemyuva to ondo ya ua nauva h\'e1tina undu!\'94\
	
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  \'cdre hamnes Orontesse *Milloaldaron, i hildor t\'faler senna \'edre anelte erinque, qu\'e9tala: \'93Nyara men: Mana i l\'fame yasse nati sine martuvar, ar mana nauva i tanwa entulesselyo ar i tyeldo i rando?\'94\
	
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93\'c1 y\'e9ta in *\'faquen tyare le ranya, 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  an rimbali tuluvar essenyanen, qu\'e9tala: 'Inye i Hristo n\'e1!', ar tyaruvalte rimbali ranya. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Hlaruvalde pa ohtali ar camuvar sinyali ohtalion; cima in ualde ruhtane! Maurenen martuvas, mal i metta en ua ut\'falie. \
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 24\

\f3\b0 Leaving, Jesus went away, but his disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  In answer he said to them: \'93Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you: Here a stone will by no means remain on a stone that will not be thrown down!\'94\
	
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  When he sat on the Mounts of Olives, the disciples came to him when they were alone, saying: \'93Tell us: What is the time when these things will happen, and what will be the sign of your return and the conclusion of the age?\'94\
	
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  In answer Jeuss said to them: \'93See that nobody causes you to err [
\f1\b ranya =
\f3\b0  stray], 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  for numerous ones will come in [or \'93by\'94, -
\f1\b nen
\f3\b0 ] my name, saying: 'I am the Christ!', and they will cause many to err. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  You will hear about wars and will receive news of wars; take heed, that you are not terrified. By necessity it will happen, but the end still has not come.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  An n\'f3re ortuva n\'f3renna ar aranie aranienna, ar euvar saicel\'e9li ar *cempali\'e9li rimbe n\'f3melissen. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ilye nati sine nar yesta naicelion.\
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  T\'e1 queneli antauvar le olla mir \uc0\u351 angie ar nahtuvar le, ar nauvalde t\'e9vaine lo ilye i n\'f3ri castanen essenyo. 
\f0\b 10
\f2\b0  Ar t\'e1 rimbali lantuvar oa ar *vartuvar qu\'e9n i exe ar tevuvar qu\'e9n i exe. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Ar rimbe *huruterc\'e1noli ortuvar ar tyaruvar rimbali ranya, 
\f0\b 12 
\f2\b0 ar pan i *\uc0\u351 anyel\'f3rie ale, melme oluva ringa i ambe rimbe quenissen. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Mal ye perpere i mettanna, isse nauva rehtana. 
\f0\b 14 
\f2\b0 Ar i evandilyon i arani\'e9no nauva carna sinwa i quanda ambaresse ve *vettie ilye i n\'f3rin, ar t\'e1 i metta tuluva.\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and [there] will be famines and earthquakes in numerous places. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  All these things are a beginning of pains.\
	
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Then people will give you over into tribulation and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations by reason of my name. 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  And then numerous ones will fall away and will betray one another and will hate one another. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  And many false prophets will arise and will cause many to err, 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  and since the lawlessness grows, love will become cold in the greater number of people. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  But [he] who endures until the end, he will be saved. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  And the gospel of the kingdom will be made known in the entire world as a witness for all the nations, and then the end will come.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Etta, \'edre cenilde i Faica Nat Nancari\'e9va, pa ya Laniel i Eruterc\'e1no carampe, t\'e1rala aire n\'f3messe\'94 \'96 lava yen hentea hanya \'96 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  \'93t\'e1 mauya in nar Yureasse u\uc0\u351 e i orontinnar. 
\f0\b 17 
\f2\b0 N\'e9r i t\'f3passe \'e1va lelya undu talien armaryar et coaryallo, 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  ar n\'e9r i restasse \'e1va nanwene coaryanna leptien collarya. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Horro i *lapsarwain ar i *tyetir vinimo ente auressen! 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Hyama i *lercielda ua martuva hr\'edvesse hya i *sendaresse, 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  an t\'e1 euva t\'fara \uc0\u351 angie, ve ua amartie i mardo yestallo tenna s\'ed, ar ua martuva ata. 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Qui ente auri \'faner nuhtane, ua enge hr\'e1ve n\'e1la rehtana, mal i c\'edlinaron m\'e1rien, ente auri nauvar nuhtane. \
	
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  T\'e1, qui aiquen quete lenna: 'Ela! Sisse n\'e1 i Hristo!', hya 'Tasse!', \'e1vasa save. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  An *huruhristoli ar *huruterc\'e1noli ortuvar ar antauvar t\'fare tanwali ar elmendali, tyarien yando i c\'edlinar ranya, qui t\'e1 n\'e1ne c\'e1rima. 
\f0\b 25 
\f2\b0 Y\'e9, len-any\'e1rien n\'f3vo.\
\

\f1\i\b 15
\f3\b0  Therefore, when you see the Disgusting Thing of Destruction, of which Daniel the Prophet spoke, standing in a holy place\'94 \'96 let [the one] who is reading understand \'96
\f2\i0  
\f1\i\b 16
\f3\b0  \'93then it is necessary for [those] who are in Judea escape to the mountains. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  A man on the roof is not to go down to bring his goods out of his house, 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  and a man in the field is not to return to his house to pick up his cloak. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Woe to the pregnant women and [those] that suckle a baby in those days! 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  Pray that your flight will not happen in winter or on the sabbath, 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  for then there will be a great tribulation, as has not happened from the beginning of the earth until now, and will not happen again. 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  If those days were not shortened, there was not [any] flesh being saved, but for the good for the chosen ones, those days will be shortened.\
	
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  Then, if anyone says to you: 'Look! Here is the Christ!', or 'There!', do not believe it [
\f1\b -sa
\f3\b0 ]. 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  For false Christs and false prophets will rise up and will give great signs and wonders, to cause also the chosen ones to stray, if that was [/were/had been] possible. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  Behold, I have told you beforehand.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Etta, qui queni quetir lenna: 'Y\'e9! N\'e1se i erumasse!', \'e1va lelya tar. Qui quetilte: 'Y\'e9, n\'e1se i mitye \uc0\u351 ambessen!', \'e1vasa save! 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  An ve i \'edta hundi\'e9va ettule R\'f3mello ar calta N\'famenna, sie euva i Atanyondo tulesse! 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  I n\'f3me yasse i quelet ea, tasse i \uc0\u351 orni ocomuvar!\
	
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Ron apa i \uc0\u351 angie mi ente r\'ed, Anar oluva morna, ar I\u351 il ua antuva i\u351 ilmerya, ar i tinwi lantuvar menello, ar menelo t\'fari nauvar p\'e1laine. 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Ar t\'e1 i tanwa i Atanyondova nauva c\'e9nina menelde, ar t\'e1 ilye nossi cemeno palpuvar inte nainiesse, ar cenuvalte i Atanyondo t\'fala menelo fanyassen arwa t\'fareo ar olya alcaro; 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  ar mentauvas valaryar taura r\'f3manen, ar comyauvalte c\'edlinaryar et i s\'farillon canta, menelo r\'e9nallo hyana r\'e9naryanna.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 26
\f3\b0  Therefore, if people say to you: 'Behold! He is in the wilderness!', do not go thither. If they say: 'Behold, he is in the inner rooms!', do not believe it! 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  For as when the flash of thunder comes out from [the] east and shines to [the] west, so it will be at the coming of the Son of Man! 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  The place where the corpse is, there the eagles will gather!\
	
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  Soon after the tribulation in those days, the Sun will bcome dark, and the Moon will not give his sheen, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven will be being shaken. 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  And then the sign of the Son of Man will be seen in heaven, and then all tribes [or families, houses] of the earth will beat themselves in lamentation, and they shall see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven having power and much glory; 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  and he will send his angels with a mighty trumpet-blast, and they will gather his chosen ones out of the four winds, from heaven's border to its other border.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 	32
\f2\b0  S\'ed para sestie sina i *rely\'e1valdanen: \'cdre olvarya ole musse ar tuias lasseryar, istalde i laire hare n\'e1. 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Sie yando elde, \'edre cenilde ilye nati sine, istar i n\'e1se hare, epe i fendi. 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna i laume autuva *n\'f3nare sina n\'f3 ilye nati sine martar. 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  Menel cemenye autuvat, mal ninye quettar uar autuva.\
	
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  Pa r\'e9 ar l\'fame enta \'faquen ista, l\'e1 i vali menelde ar l\'e1 i Yondo, mal i Atar erinqua. 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  An ve r\'e9ryar Noa\uc0\u295  n\'e1ner, sie euva m\'ed Atanyondo tulesse. 
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  An tambe anelte yane auressen n\'f3 i Oloire, matila ar sucila, veryala ar n\'e1la vertane, tenna i aure ya Noa\uc0\u295  lende mir i marcirya, 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  ar hanyanelte munta tenna i Oloire t\'fale ar colde te illi oa, s\'edve i Atanyondo tulesse euva.\
\

\f1\i\b 	32
\f3\b0  Now learn this comparison from [-
\f1\b nen
\f3\b0 , by] the fig tree: When its branch becomes soft and it sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near. 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  Thus you as well, when you see all these things, know that he is near, before the doors. 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you that this generation shall by no means pass away before all these things happen. 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words will not pass away.\
	
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  Of that day and hour nobody knows, not the angels in heaven and not the Son, but the Father alone. 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  For as the days of Noah were, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. 
\f1\b 38
\f3\b0  For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, marrying and being married off, until the day that Noah went into the ark; 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  and they understood nothing until the Flood came and carried them off, so the coming of the Son of Man will be.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 40
\f2\b0  T\'e1 n\'e9r atta euvat er restasse: Q\'faen nauva talana ar i exe nauva hehtana. 
\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  N\'eds atta muluvat i imya *mulmanen: qu\'e9n nauva talana ar i exe nauva hehtana. 
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  Etta na cuive, an ualde ista mi mana r\'e9 Herulda tuluva. \
	
\f0\b 43
\f2\b0  Mal \'e1 ista si: Qui i *coantur sinte mi mana tiresse i arpo tuluva, anes cuiva ar ua l\'e1ve aiquenen race mir coarya. 
\f0\b 44
\f2\b0  Etta yando elde na manwe, an i Atanyondo tuluva mi l\'fame yasse ualde sana sie.\
	
\f0\b 45
\f2\b0  Man n\'e1 i voronda ar saila m\'f3l ye herurya panyane or coaryo queni, antaven tien matta i vanima l\'famesse? 
\f0\b 46
\f2\b0  Valima n\'e1 m\'f3l tana qui herurya, \'edre h\'e9 tule, hire se c\'e1ra sie. 
\f0\b 47
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna: H\'e9 panyuva se or ilqua ya h\'e9 same.\
\

\f1\i\b 40
\f3\b0  Then two men shall be in one field: One will be brought [along] and the other will be abandoned. 
\f1\b 41
\f3\b0  Two women will grind with the same mill; one will be brought [along] and the other will be abandoned. 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  Therefore be awake, for you do not know what day your Lord will come.\
	
\f1\b 43
\f3\b0  But know this: If the master of the house knew in what watch the thief will come, he was [or, would be] awake and did not allow anyone to break into his house. 
\f1\b 44
\f3\b0  Therefore you as well be ready, for the Son of Man will come in an hour when you do not think so.\
	
\f1\b 45
\f3\b0  Who is the faithful and wise thrall whom his lord put over the people of his house, to give them food in the proper hour? 
\f1\b 46
\f3\b0  Happy is that thrall if his lord, when he comes, finds him doing so. 
\f1\b 47
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you: He will put him over everything that he has.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 48
\f2\b0  Mal qui tana ulca m\'f3l quetuva endaryasse: 'Herunya n\'e1 telwa', 
\f0\b 49
\f2\b0  ar *yestuvas palpa i hyane m\'f3li ar sucuva as i quatir inte limpenen, 
\f0\b 50
\f2\b0  t\'e1 tana m\'f3lo heru tuluva auresse ya uas apacene ar l\'famesse ya uas ista, 
\f0\b 51
\f2\b0  ar se-paimetuvas naraca l\'e9nen ar antauva sen i imya metta ya i *imnetyandor camir. Tasse euvar n\'edreryar ar mulierya nelciva.\
\

\f1\i\b 48
\f0\i0  
\f3\i\b0 But if that evil slave will say in his heart: 'My lord is late', 
\f1\b 49
\f3\b0  and he will begin to beat the other slaves and drink with [those] that fill themselves with wine, 
\f1\b 50
\f3\b0  then the lord of that slave will come on a day that he does not foresee and in an hour that he does not know, 
\f1\b 51
\f3\b0  and he will punish him in a harsh manner and will give him the same end that the hypocrites receive. There will be his tears and his grinding of teeth.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 25  \

\f2\b0 T\'e1 menelo aranie nauva ve vendi quean i taller calmaltar ar lender ettenna velien i ender. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Lempe mici te n\'e1ner alasaile, ar lempe n\'e1ner saile. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  An i aucar namper calmaltar mal uar talle millo aselte, 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  \'edre i sailar namper millo olpeltassen as calmaltar. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  \'cdre i ender n\'e1ne telwa, illi mici t\'e9 n\'e1ner lorde ar h\'famer. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Endesse i l\'f3mio enge y\'e1me: 'Y\'e9 i ender! Mena se-velien!' \
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 25\

\f3\b0 Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten maidens that brought their lamps and went outside to meet the bridegroom. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  Five among them were unwise, and five were wise. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  For the foolish ones took their lamps but did not bring oil with them, 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  while the wise ones brought oil in their bottles with their lamps. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  When the bridegroom was late, all among them were slumberous and slept. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  In the middle of the night [there] was a cry: \'93Behold the bridegroom! Go to meet him!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  T\'e1 ilye tane vendi oronter ar manwaner calmaltar. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  I alasailar quenter i sailannar: '\'c1men anta et milloldo, an calmalmar ron nauvar *luhtyane!' 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  I sailar hanquenter: \'93C\'e9 i millo ua faryuva men ar len. I mende mena ar \'e1 *homanca elden!\'94 
\f0\b 10 
\f2\b0 Apa oantelte *homancien, i ender t\'fale, ar i vendi i n\'e1ner manwe lende \'f3se i merendenna veryangweo, ar i fenna n\'e1ne holtana. 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Epeta i hyane vendi yando t\'faler, qu\'e9tala: 'Heru, heru, \'e1men latya!' 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse eques: 'N\'e1sie quetin lenna, uan ista le!'\
	
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  Etta cima, an ualde ista i aure hya i l\'fame. 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  An i natto n\'e1 ve \'edre n\'e9r ye lelyumne hyana n\'f3renna tultane m\'f3lyar ar antaner armaryar mir hepielta. 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar quenen mici te antanes \ul talenti\ulnone  lempe, exen atta, exen er \'96 ve fintielta. T\'e1 lendes oa.\
\

\f1\i\b 7
\f3\b0  Then all those maidens arose and prepared their lamps. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  The unwise ones said to the wise ones: 'Give us of out of your oil, for our lambs will soon be extinguished!\'94 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  The wise ones answered: 'Maybe the oil will not suffice for us and for you. Instead go and buy for yourselves!' 
\f1\b 10
\f3\b0  After they went away to buy, the bridegroom came, and the maidens that were ready went with him to the feast of marriage, and the door was closed. 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  Afterwards the other maidens also came, saying: 'Lord, lord, open for us!' 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  In answer he said: 'Truly I say to you, I do not know you!'\
	
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Therefore take heed, for you do not know the day or the hour. 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  For the matter is like when a man who was going to travel to another country summoned his thralls and gave his goods into their keeping. 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And to one among them he gave five talents, to another two, to another one \'96 according to their skill. Then he went away.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Linti\'e9nen ye camne i \ul talenti\ulnone  lempe lende oa ar mancane tainen, ar \'f1entes an lempe. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  M\'ed imya l\'e9 ye camne i atta \'f1ente an atta. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Mal ye camne i er, oante ar sampe i talamesse ar nurtane i telpe heruryava.\
	
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Apa anda l\'fame i heru sane m\'f3lion t\'fale ar s\'e1me on\'f3tie aselte. 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Ar t\'falala ompa, ye camne i \ul talenti\ulnone  lempe talle an \ul talenti\ulnone  lempe, qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, antanel \ul talenti\ulnone  lempe mir hepienya. Ela, e\'f1\'e9tien an \ul talenti\ulnone  lempe!\'94 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Herurya quente senna: \'93Mai carna, m\'e1ra ar voronda m\'f3l! Anel voronda or n\'f3time natali. Panyuvan lye or rimbe natali. Tula mir herulyo alasse!\'94\
	
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Y\'fa ye camne i \ul talent\ulnone  atta t\'fale ompa ar quente: \'93Heru, \ul talent\ulnone  atta antanel mir hepienya. Ela, e\'f1\'e9tiel an \ul talent\ulnone  atta!\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Herurya quente senna: \'93Mai carna, m\'e1ra ar voronda m\'f3l!  Anel voronda or n\'f3time natali. Panyuvan lye or rimbe natali. Tula mir herulyo alasse!\'94\
\

\f3\i Quickly [he] that received the five talents went away and traded with them, and he gained another five. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  In the same manner [he] who received the two gained another two. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  But [he] that received the one, went off and dug in the ground and hid the money of his lord.\
	
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  After a long time the lord of those thralls came and had a reckoning with them. 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  And coming forward, [he] that received thmattme five talents brought another five talents, saying: \'93Lord, you gave five talents into my keeping. Behold, I have gained another five talents!\'94 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  His lord said to him: \'93Well done, good and faithful thrall! You were faithful over a few things. I will put you over many things. Come into the joy of your lord!\'94\
	
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  Also [he] who received the two talents came forward and said: \'93Lord, two talents you gave into my keeping. Behold, I have gained another two talents!\'94 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  His lord said to him: \'93Well, done, good and faithful thrall! You were faithful over a few things. I will put you over many things. Come into your the joy of your lord!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  I mettasse ye camne i er \ul talent\ulnone  t\'fale ompa ar quente: \'93Heru, istan i nalye naraca n\'e9r, *cirihtala yasse ual rende ar comyala yasse ual vintane. 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Etta anen ruhtaina ar oante ar nurtane \ul talent\ulnone elya i talamesse. Sisse samil ya *lyenya n\'e1!\'94 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse eques: \'93Olca ar lenca m\'f3l, t\'e1 sintel i *cirihtan yasse uan rende ar comyan yasse uan vintane? 
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Etta mauyane lyen panya telpenya as i *sarnomor, ar \'edre t\'falen ence nin came ya ninya n\'e9 as nap\'e1nina telpe!\
	
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Etta alde mapa i \ul talent\ulnone  sello ar \'e1sa anta yen same i \ul talenti\ulnone  quean! 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  An ilquenen ye same, amba nauva antana ar samuvas \'fave, mal ye ua same \'96 yando ya samis nauva mapana sello! 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Ar alde hate i *alam\'e1ra m\'f3l mir i mornie i ettesse! Tasse euvar n\'edreryar ar molierya nelciva.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 24
\f3\b0  In the end [he] that received the one talent came forward and said: \'93Lord, I know that you are a harsh man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not scatter. 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  Therefore I was terrified and went off and hid your talent in the ground. Here you have what is yours!\'94 
\f1\b 26 
\f3\b0 In answer he said: \'93Wicked and dull thrall, then you knew that I reap where I did not sow and gather where I did not scatter? 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  Therefore it was necessary for you to put my money with the bankers, and when I came I could receive what was mine with added money [= interest]. \
	
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  Therefore you [pl.] are to take the talent from him and give it to the one that has the ten talents! 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  For to everyone that has, more will be given and he will have abundance, but [he] that does not have \'96 also what he has will be taken from him! 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  And you [pl.] are to throw the no-good thrall into the darkness on the outside! There will be his tears and his grinding of teeth.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 	31
\f2\b0  Mal \'edre i Atanyondo tuluva alcareryasse, ar ilye i vali \'f3se, t\'e1 hamuvas undu alcarinqua mahalmaryasse. 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Ar ilye i n\'f3ri nauvar comyane epe se, ar te-*ciltuvas qu\'e9n i exello, ve \'edre mavar *cilta i m\'e1mar i ny\'e9nillon. 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Ar panyuvas m\'e1maryar ara formarya, mal i ny\'e9nir ara hyarmarya.\
	
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i aran quetuva innar t\'e1rar foryaryasse: 'Tula, le i nar aistane lo Atarinya, \'e1 harya i aranie manwana len tulciello mardeva! 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  An anen maita ar antanelde nin matta; anen soica, ar antanelde nin nat sucien; anen ettelea ar camnelde ni, 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  helda, ar tumpelde ni. Anen hlaiwa ar *cimbanelde ni, anen mandosse ar t\'falelde ninna.' 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i failar hanquetuvar senna sie: 'Heru, mana i l\'fa ya cennelme lye maita ar antaner lyen matta, hya soica, ar antane lyen nat sucien? 
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  Mana i l\'fa ya cennelme lye ve ettelea qu\'e9n ar camner lye, hya helda, ar tumper lye? 
\f0\b 39 
\f2\b0 Mana i l\'fa ya cennelme lye hlaiwa hya mandosse ar t\'faler lyenna?'  
\f0\b 40
\f2\b0  Ar hanquentasse i aran quetuva t\'e9na: 'N\'e1sie quetin lenna: I lestasse ya carnelde ta quenen mici ampitye h\'e1nonyar sine, m\'ed imya lesta inyen carneldes.'\
\
	
\f1\i\b 31
\f3\b0  But when the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne. 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  And all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate them one from the other, as when a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  And he will put his sheep at [
\f1\b ara
\f3\b0  = beside] his right hand, but the goats at his left hand. \
	
\f1\b 34 
\f3\b0 Then the king will say to [those] that are standing to his right: 'Come, you who are blessed by my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world! 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  For I was hungry and you gave he food; I was thirsty, and you gave me something to drink; I was a stranger, and you received me, 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  naked, and you covered me. I was sick and you cared for me, I was in prison and you came to me.' 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  Then the just ones will answer him so: 'Lord, what [was] the time that we saw you hungry and gave you food, or thisty, and gave you something to drink? 
\f1\b 38
\f3\b0  What [was] the time that we saw you as a foreign person and received you, or naked, and covered you? 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  What [was] the time that we saw you sick or in prison and came to you?' 
\f1\b 40
\f3\b0  And in answer the king will say to them: 'Truly I say to you: In the measure [= to the extent] that you did that to one among these smallest brothers of mine, in the same measure to me you did it.'\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  T\'e1 quetuvas y\'fa innar t\'e1rar hyaryaryasse: '\'c1 auta nillo, elde i nar h\'fane lo Atarinya, mir i oira n\'e1re ya anaie manwana i Araucon ar valaryain! 
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  Anen maita, ar antanelde nin munta matien, anen soica ar antanelde nin munta sucien, 
\f0\b 43
\f2\b0  anen ettelea ar ualde camne ni, helda ar ualde tumper ni, hlaiwa ar mandosse, mal ualde *cimbane ni.' 
\f0\b 44
\f2\b0  T\'e1 y\'fa t\'e9 hanquetuvar, qu\'e9tala: 'Heru, mana i l\'fa ya cennelme lye maita hya soica hya ettelea hya helda hya hlaiwa hya mandosse, ar ualme *veuyane len?' 
\f0\b 45 
\f2\b0 T\'e1 hanquetuvas lenna sie: 'N\'e1sie quetin lenna: I lestasse ya loitanelde care sie quenen mici sine ampityar, m\'ed imya lesta loitanelde caritas inyen.'
\f0\b  46
\f2\b0  Ar autuvalte mir oira paime, mal i failar, mir oira coivie.\
\

\f1\i\b 	41
\f3\b0  Then he will say also to [the ones] that are standing at his right: 'Pass from me, you that are accursed by my Father, into the eternal fire that has been prepared for the Devil and his angels! 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  I was hungry, and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink, 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  I was a stranger and you did not receive me, naked and you did not cover me, sick and in prison, but you did not care for me.' 
\f1\b 44
\f3\b0  Then they as well will answer, saying: 'Lord, what was the time that we saw you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and we did not serve you?' 
\f1\b 45 
\f3\b0 Then he will answer them so: 'Truly I say to you: In the measure that you failed to do so to one among these smallest ones, in the same measure you failed to do it for me.' 
\f1\b 46
\f3\b0  And they will go off into eternal punishment, but the just ones, into eternal life.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 26 \

\f2\b0 Ar apa Y\'e9sus telyane ilye quetier sine, quentes hildoryannar: 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  \'93Istalde i aure atta ho s\'ed i *Lahtale tuluva, ar i Atanyondo nauva antana olla n\'e1ven tarwestana!\'94\

\f0\b 	3
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i h\'e9re *airimor ar i amy\'e1rar im\'edca i lie ocomner i pacasse i h\'e9ra *airim\'f3va, yeo esse n\'e1ne Caiafas, 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  ar carner panoli uo mapien Y\'e9sus curunen ar nahtien se. 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Mal quentelte: \'93L\'e1 i a\uc0\u351 aresse, hya euva amortie im\'edca i lie!\'94\
	
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  \'cdre Y\'e9sus enge Vetaniasse, mi coarya S\'edmon Helmahlaiwa, 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  n\'eds arwa ondocolco quanta n\'ed\uc0\u351 ima millo t\'fale senna, ar sa-ulyanes caryanna \'edre caines ara i sarno. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  C\'e9nala ta, i hildor n\'e1ner rusce ar quenter: \'93Mana i casta hatien oa i millo? An mo polde vacitas hoa n\'f3ten, antaven sa penyain!\'94 \
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 26\

\f3\b0 And after Jesus completed all these sayings, he said to his disciples: 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  \'93You know that two days from now the Passover will come, and the Son of Man will be given over to be crucified!\'94\
	
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  Then the chief priests and the elders among the people gathered in the courtyard of the chref priest, whose name was Caiaphas, 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  and made plans together to seize Jesus by cunning and to kill him. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  But they said: \'93Not at the festival, or [there] will be an uprising among the people!\'94\
	
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  When Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the Leper, 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  a woman having a stone-box full of fragrant oil came to him, and she poured it on his head when he lay at the table. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Seeing that, the disciples were wroth and said: \'93What is the reason for throwing away the oil? For one could sell it for a great sum, to give it to [the] poor!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Istala si, Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Manen n\'e1 i c\'e1ralde *tarastie i nissen, \'edre ac\'e1ries m\'e1ra carda nin? 
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  An i penyar samilde illume mici le, mal ualde illume samuva ni. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  An \'edre n\'eds sina panyane n\'ed\uc0\u351 ima millo sina hroanyasse, carneses ni-manwien i noirin. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  N\'e1sie quetin lenna: Quiquie evandilyon sina nauva carna sinwa i quanda mardesse, ya n\'eds sina carne yando nauva ny\'e1rina enyalien s\'e9!\'94\
	
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  T\'e1 qu\'e9n im\'edca i yunque, isse yeo esse n\'e1ne Y\'faras, lende i h\'e9re *airimonnar 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  ar quente: \'93Mana antauvalde nin qui antanyes olla len?\'94 Ar panyanelte telpemittar *nelequean epe se. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Ar cestanes manen antauvanes h\'e9 olla \'edre ence sen.\
	
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Minya auresse *Alapal\'fane Massaron i hildor t\'faler Y\'e9sunna, qu\'e9tala: \'93Masse meril i manwalme lyen, matielyan i Lahtie?\'94 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Quentes t\'e9na: \'93Mena mir i osto ana sie-yo-sie ar queta senna: I Peantar quete: 'L\'famenya hare n\'e1; coalyasse caruvan i Lahtie as hildonyar.'\'94 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ar i hildor carner ve Y\'e9sus canne tien, ar manwanelte i Lahtien.\
\

\f1\i\b 	9
\f3\b0  Knowing this, Jesus said to them: \'93How is [it] that you are making trouble for the woman, when she has done a good deed to me? 
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  For the poor you have always among you, but you will not always have me. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  For when this woman put this fragrant oil on my body, she did it to prepare me for the tomb. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Truly I say to you: Wherever this gospel will be made known in the entire world, what this woman did will also be told in memory of her!\'94\
	
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  Then one among the twelve, he whose name was Judas, went to the chief priests 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  and said: \'93What will you give me if I give him over to you?\'94 And they put thirty silver pieces before him. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  And he sought how he was going to give him over when it was possible for him.\
	
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  On the first day of Unleavened Breads the disciples came to Jesus, saying: \'93Where do you wish that we prepare for you, for you to eat the Passover?\'94 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  He said to them: \'93Go into the city to so-and-so and say to him: The teacher says: 'My time is near; in your house I will make the Passover with my disciples!\'94 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  And the disciples did as Jesus commanded them, and they prepared the Passover.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  \'cdre \uc0\u351 inye t\'fale, caines ara i sarno as i hildor yunque. \'cdre m\'e1tanelte, quentes: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lenna: Qu\'e9n im\'edca le antauva ni olla!\'94 
\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  N\'fara nairesse ilya qu\'e9n mici te *yestane quete senna:  \'93Lau inye n\'e1 s\'e9, Heru?\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse eques: \'93Ye sumba m\'e1rya asinye i salpesse n\'e1 ye antauva ni olla. 
\f0\b 24
\f2\b0  I Atanyondo \'e9 autuva, ve n\'e1 t\'e9cina pa s\'e9, mal horro i neren lo ye i Atanyondo antane olla n\'e1! N\'e1ne arya tana neren qui \'fanes n\'f3na!\'94 
\f0\b 25 
\f2\b0 Hanquentasse Y\'faras, ye antauvane se olla, quente: \'93Lau inye n\'e1 s\'e9, Rappi?\'94 Quentes senna: \'93Elye equ\'e9tie sa!\'94 \
	\

\f1\i\b 	20
\f3\b0  When evening came, he lay at the table with the twelve disciples. While they were eating, he said: \'93Truly I say to you: One among you will give me over!\'94 
\f1\b 22
\f3\b0  In deep grief every one among them began to say to him: 'Surely I am not he, Lord?'\'94 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  In answer he said: \'93[He] who dips his hand with me in the bowl is [the one] who will give me over. 
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  The Son of Man will indeed pass away, as is written about him, but woe to the man by whom the Son of Man is given over! [It] was better for that man if he was not born!\'94 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  In answer Judas, who was going to betray him, said: \'93Surely I am not he, Rabbi?\'94 He said to him: \'93You have said it!\'94\
	\

\f0\i0\b 26
\f2\b0  Lan m\'e1tanelte, Y\'e9sus nampe massa, ar apa quetie aistie ranceses, ar antala sa hildoryain quentes: \'93\'c1sa mapa, mata! Si hroanya n\'e1!\'94  
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  Ar nampes yulma, ar apa antave hantale sa-antanes tien, qu\'e9tala: \'93Suca et sallo, illi mici le! 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  An si n\'e1 sercenya i v\'e9reo, ya nauva etulyaina r\'e1 rimbalin apsenien \'facariva. 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  Mal quetin lenna: Laume sucuvan sina y\'e1vello i liantasseo tenna enta aure yasse sucuvanyes vinya aselde Atarinyo araniesse!\'94 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Ar apa lindie i *airil\'edri etelendelte Orontenna *Milloaldaron.\
\

\f1\i\b 26
\f3\b0  While they were eating, Jesus took a bread, and after speaking a blessing he broke it, and giving it to his disciples he said: \'93Take it, eat! This is my body!\'94 
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  And he took a cup, and after giving thanks he gave it to them, saying: \'93Drink of it, all among you! 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  For this is my blood of the covenant, which will be poured forth on behalf of numerous ones for forgiveness of sins. 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  But I say to you: I will by no means drink of this fruit of the vine until that day when I shall drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom!\'94 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  And after singing the hymns they went out to the Mount of Olives.\
\

\f2\i0 	
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus quente t\'e9na: \'93Illi mici le lantuvar oa nillo l\'f3me sinasse, an n\'e1 t\'e9cina: 'Petuvan i mavar, ar i lam\'e1reo m\'e1mar nauvar vintane.' 
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  Mal apa n\'e1venya ortana, lelyuvan epe le mir Alilea!\'94 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Mal hanquentasse P\'e9ter quente senna: \'93Qui illi lantuvar oa lello, inye ua oi lantuva oa!\'94 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93N\'e1sie quetin lenna: L\'f3me sinasse, n\'f3 tocot lamyuva, ni-laquetuval nel!\'94 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  P\'e9ter quente senna: \'93Qui mauya nin quale aselye, uan oi laquetuva lye!\'94 Ilye i hyane hildor quenter i imya nat.\
\
	
\f1\i\b 31
\f3\b0  Then Jesus said to them: \'93All among you will fall away from me in this night, for it is written: 'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.' 
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  But after my being raised, I will go before you into Galilee!\'94 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  But in answer Peter said to him: \'93[Even] if all will fall away from you, I will not fall away!\'94 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  Jesus said to him: \'93Truly I say to you: In this night, before a cock shall sound, you will deny me thrice!\'94 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  Peter said to him: \'93If it is necessary for me to die with you, I shall not ever deny you!\'94 All the other disciples said the same thing.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus t\'fale aselte i n\'f3menna estaina Etsemane, ar quentes hildoryannar: \'93Hama sisse \'edre lelyan tar hyamien!\'94 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  Ar t\'e1lala P\'e9ter ar i yondo atta Severaio as inse, *yestanes same naire ar n\'e1ve *tarastaina. 
\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  T\'e1 quentes t\'e9na: \'93Feanya n\'e1 lunga tenna qualme nairenen. \'c1 lemya sisse ar hepa inde coive asinye!\'94 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  Apa menie \uc0\u351 inta vanta ompa, lantanes cendeleryanna, hy\'e1mala ar qu\'e9tala: \'93Atarinya, qui ta n\'e1 c\'e1rima, nai yulma sina autuva nillo! Ananta, l\'e1 ve inye mere, mal ve ty\'e9 mere!\'94\

\f0\b 	40 
\f2\b0 Ar t\'fales i hildonnar ar hirne te lorne, ar quentes P\'e9terenna: \'93Ma ualde polde hepe inde coive ter erya l\'fame asinye? 
\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  Na coive ar hyama, hya lantuvalde mir \'fa\uc0\u351 ahtie! An i faire m\'edna n\'e1, mal i hr\'e1ve milya n\'e1!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 36
\f3\b0  Then Jesus came with them to the place called Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples: \'93Sit here while I go thither to pray!\'94 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  And bringing Peter and the two sons of Zebedee with himself, he began to have grief and to be troubled. 
\f1\b 38
\f3\b0  Then he said to them: \'93My soul is heavy until death with grief. Remain here and keep yourselves awake with me!\'94 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  After going a short walk forward, he fell upon his face, praying and saying: \'93My Father, if that is possible, may this cup pass away from me! And yet, not as I wish, but as you wish!\'94\
	
\f1\b 40
\f3\b0  And he came to the disciples and found them asleep, and he said to Peter: \'93Could you not keep yourselves awake for [
\f1\b ter
\f3\b0  = through] a single hour with me? 
\f1\b 41
\f3\b0  Be awake and pray, or you will fall into temptation! For the spirit is eager, but the flesh is weak!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  Ata, mi tatya l\'fa, lendes oa ar hyamne, qu\'e9tala: \'93Atarinya, qui ua c\'e1rima i si autuva \'fa sucienyo sa, nai ind\'f3melya martuva!\'94 
\f0\b 43
\f2\b0  Ar t\'fales ata, ar hirneset lorne, an hendultat n\'e1net lunge. 
\f0\b 44
\f2\b0  
\f0\b  
\f2\b0 Ar lendes oa tello ar hyamne mi neldea l\'fa, qu\'e9tala i imya quetta ata. 
\f0\b 45
\f2\b0  T\'e1 t\'fales i hildonnar ar quente t\'e9na: \'93Lau en h\'famalde ar s\'e9ralde? Y\'e9, i l\'fame n\'e1 hare yasse i Atanyondo nauva antana olla mannar \'facarindoron! 
\f0\b 46
\f2\b0  \'c1 orta, alve mene! Ela! Ye anta ni olla ut\'falie hare!\'94\
	
\f0\b 47
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre i quettar en enger antoryasse, y\'e9, tasse t\'fale Y\'faras, qu\'e9n i yunqueo, ar \'f3se hoa \uc0\u351 anga arwa macillion ar rundalion t\'fale ho i h\'e9re *airimor ar i amy\'e1rar mici i lie.\
	
\f0\b 48
\f2\b0  Ye antane se olla antanelyane tien tanwa, qu\'e9tala: \'93Aiquen ye miquin, \'e1se mapa mir mando!\'94 
\f0\b 49
\f2\b0  Ar t\'e9rave lendes Y\'e9sunna ar quente: \'93Hara m\'e1riesse, Rappi!
\f3\i \'94,
\f2\i0  ar minqueses. \
\
	
\f1\i\b 42
\f3\b0  Again, for [lit. in] a second time, he went away and prayed, saying: \'93My Father, if it is not possible that this will pass without my drinking it, let your will happen!\'94 
\f1\b 43
\f3\b0  And he came again, and found them asleep, for their eyes were heavy. 
\f1\b 44
\f3\b0  And he went away from them and prayed for a third time, saying the same word again. 
\f1\b 45
\f3\b0  Then he came to the disciples and said to them: \'93Surely you are not still sleeping and resting? Behold, the time is near when the Son of Man will be given over into the hands of sinners! 
\f1\b 46
\f3\b0  Rise, let us go! Look! [He] who betrays me has come near!\'94\
	
\f1\b 47
\f3\b0  And while the words were still in his mouth, behold, there came Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great crowd having swords and clubs came from the chief priests and the elders among the people.\
	
\f1\b 48
\f3\b0  [He] who gave him over had given them a sign, saying: \'93Anyone that I kiss, take him into custody!\'94 
\f1\b 49
\f3\b0  And straightway he went to Jesus and said: \'93Greetings, Rabbi!\'94, and he kissed him.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 50
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93M\'e1lo, mana castalya tulien?\'94 T\'e1 t\'falelte ompa ar panyaner m\'e1 Y\'e9susse ar nampe se mir mando. 
\f0\b 51
\f2\b0  Mal y\'e9, qu\'e9n mici i n\'e1ner as Y\'e9sus rahtane m\'e1ryanen ar tunce macilya ar pente i h\'e9ra *airimo m\'f3l ar aucirne hlarya. 
\f0\b 52
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93\'c1 panya macilelya n\'f3meryanna ata, an illi i mapar i macil nauvar nancarne i macilden. 
\f0\b 53
\f2\b0  Hya ual intya i lertan arca Atarinyanna, mentaveryan ninna l\'fa sinasse or \ul lehi\'f3ni\ulnone  yunque valion? 
\f0\b 54
\f2\b0  Mal t\'e1 manen nauvas carna nanwa, i Tehtele ya quete i sie mauyas marta?\'94 \
	
\f0\b 55
\f2\b0  L\'fame yanasse Y\'e9sus quente i \uc0\u351 angannar: \'93Ma ut\'falielde arwe macillion ar rundalion, ve pilunna, ni-mapien? Aure apa aure hamnen i cordasse peantala, ananta ualde nampe ni. 
\f0\b 56
\f2\b0  Mal ilqua sina amartie carien i Tehtele nanwa!\'94 T\'e1 ilye i hildor hehtaner se ar \'fa\uc0\u351 er.\
\

\f1\i\b 50
\f3\b0  But Jesus said to him: \'93Fellow, what is your reason for coming?\'94 Then they came forward and laid hand on Jesus and took him into custody. 
\f1\b 51
\f3\b0  But behold, one among [those] that were with Jesus reached out with his hand and drew his sword and struck the chief priest's thrall and cut off his ear. 
\f1\b 52
\f3\b0  Then Jesus said to him: \'93Put your sword in its place again, for all that take [to] the sword will be undone by the sword [
\f1\b macil-nen
\f3\b0  > 
\f1\b macilden
\f3\b0 ]. 
\f1\b 53
\f3\b0  Or do you not suppose that I can make petition to my Father, for him to send me in this moment over twelve legions of angels? 
\f1\b 54
\f3\b0  But then how will it be made true, the Scripture that says that so it must happen?\'94\
	
\f1\b 55
\f3\b0  In that time Jesus said to the crowds: \'93Have you come with swords and clubs, as upon a robber, to seize me? Day after day I sat in the temple teaching, and yet you did not seize me. 
\f1\b 56
\f3\b0  But all this has happened to make the Scripture [come] true!\'94 Then all the disciples abandoned him and fled.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 	57
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i namper Y\'e9sus tulyane se oa Caiafas i h\'e9ra *airimonna, \'edre i parmangolmor ar i amy\'e1rar ocomner. 
\f0\b 58
\f2\b0  Mal P\'e9ter hilyane te hairallo, tenna paca i h\'e9ra *airim\'f3va, ar lendes minna ar hamune as i n\'faror, cenien i metta. \
	
\f0\b 59
\f2\b0  I h\'e9re *airimor ar i T\'e1ra Combe cestaner h\'farala *vettie Y\'e9sunna, nahtieltan se, 
\f0\b 60
\f2\b0  mal hirnelte munta, \'f3mu rimbe h\'farala astarmoli t\'faler ompa. M\'ed tyel, atta t\'falet ompa 
\f0\b 61
\f2\b0  ar quentet: \'93N\'e9r sina equ\'e9tie: 'Polin hate undu i corda Eruva ar carasta sa ama ter auri nelde!'\'94 
\f0\b 62
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i h\'e9ra *airimo oronte ar quente senna: \'93Ma munta hanqu\'e9tal? Mana ya queni sine *vettar lyenna?\'94 
\f0\b 63
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus n\'e1ne quilda. Ar i h\'e9ra *airimo quente senna: \'93I coirea Erunen panyan lye nu vanda i nyaruval men qui nalye i Hristo, i Eruion!\'94 
\f0\b 64
\f2\b0  Y\'e9sus quente senna: \'93Elye equ\'e9tie sa. Mal quetin lenna: Ho s\'ed cenuvalde i Eruion h\'e1ra ara i T\'fareo forma ar t\'fala menelo fanyassen!\'94\
\
	
\f1\i\b 57
\f3\b0  Then [those] who seized Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the chief priest, while the scribes and the elders assembled. 
\f1\b 58 
\f3\b0 But Peter followed them from afar, as far as the courtyard of the chief priest, and he went inside and sat down with the servants, to see the end.\
	
\f1\b 59
\f3\b0  The chief priests and the High Counsil sought lying testimony against Jesus, for them to kill him, 
\f1\b 60
\f3\b0  but they found nothing, though numerous lying witnesses came forward. In the end, two came forward 
\f1\b 61
\f3\b0  and said: \'93This man has said: 'I can throw down the temple of God and build it up in [
\f1\b ter
\f3\b0  = through] three days.'\'94  
\f1\b 62
\f3\b0  Then the chief priest arose and said to him: \'93Are you answering nothing? What is [it] that these people witness against you?\'94 
\f1\b 63
\f3\b0  But Jesus was silent. And the chief priest said to him: \'93By the living God I put you under oath that you will tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God!\'94 
\f1\b 64
\f3\b0  Jesus said to him: \'93You have said it. But I say to you: From now [on] you will see the Son of God sitting by the right hand of the Power and coming on the clouds of heaven!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 65
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i h\'e9ra *airimo narcane larmaryar, qu\'e9tala: \'93Naiequ\'e9ties! Mana an maure astarmoiva samilve? Y\'e9! Ahl\'e1rielde i i naiquetie. 
\f0\b 66
\f2\b0   Mana sanalde?\'94 Hanquentelte: \'93N\'e1se valda qualmeo!\'94 
\f0\b 67
\f2\b0  T\'e1 piutanelte cendeleryanna ar penter se nondaltainen, 
\f0\b 68
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93Queta men ve Eruterc\'e1no, a Hristo! Man n\'e1 ye pente lye?\'94\
	
\f0\b 69
\f2\b0  S\'ed P\'e9ter hamne i ettasse i pacasse, ar *n\'fare t\'fale senna, qu\'e9tala: \'93Yando elye n\'e1ne as Y\'e9sus Alileallo!\'94 
\f0\b 70
\f2\b0  Mal laquentes ta epe illi, qu\'e9tala: \'93Uan ista pa mana qu\'e9tal!\'94 
\f0\b 71
\f2\b0  Apa lendes ettenna i andonna, hyana vende t\'fane se ar quente innar enger tasse: \'93N\'e9r sina n\'e1ne as Y\'e9sus Nasaretello!\'94 
\f0\b 72
\f2\b0  Ar ata laquentes ta, vandanen: \'93Uan ista i n\'e9r!\'94 \
\

\f1\i\b 65 
\f3\b0 Then the chief priest tore his garments, saying: \'93He has blasphemed! What further need for [
\f1\b -va
\f3\b0 ] witnesses do we have? Behold! You have heart the blasphemy. 
\f1\b 66
\f3\b0  What do you think?\'94 They answered: \'93He is worthy of death!\'94 
\f1\b 67
\f3\b0  Then they spat in his face and struck him with fists, 
\f1\b 68
\f3\b0  saying: \'93Speak to us as a prophet, o Christ! Who is [it] that struck you?\'94\
	
\f1\b 69
\f3\b0  Now Peter sat down on the outside in the court, and a maidservant came to him, saying: \'93You too were with Jesus from Galilee!\'94 
\f1\b 70
\f3\b0  But he denied that before all, saying: \'93I do not know of what you are speaking!\'94 
\f1\b 71
\f3\b0  After he went out to the gate, another maiden noticed him and said [to the ones] that were there: \'93This man was with Jesus from Nazareth!\'94 
\f1\b 72
\f3\b0  And again he denied it, with an oath: \'93I do not know the man!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 73
\f2\b0  Apa \uc0\u351 inta l\'fame i tarner *os se t\'faler ar quenter P\'e9terenna: \'93\'c9 nalye mici te, an questalya apanta lye!\'94 
\f0\b 74
\f2\b0  T\'e1 *yestanes h\'fata ar quete vandal\'ednen: \'93Uan ista i n\'e9r!\'94 Ar m\'ed imya l\'fa tocot lamyane. 
\f0\b 75
\f2\b0  Ar P\'e9ter enyalde ya Y\'e9sus quente: 'N\'f3 tocot lamyuva, ni-laluval nel!\'94 
\f0\b 76
\f2\b0  Ar lendes ettenna ar l\'e1ve s\'e1re n\'edrin sire.\
\

\f1\i\b 73
\f3\b0  After a short time those that stood around him came and said to Peter: \'93Indeed you are among them, for your speech reveals you!\'94 
\f1\b 74
\f3\b0  Then he started to curse and say with oaths: \'93I do not know the man!\'94 And in the same moment a cock sounded. 
\f1\b 75
\f3\b0  And Peter recalled [that] which Jesus said: \'93Before a cock shall sound, you will deny me thrice!\'94 
\f1\b 76
\f3\b0  And he went outside and let bitter tears flow.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 27\

\f2\b0 \'cdre arin t\'fale, ilye i h\'e9re *airimor ar i amy\'e1rar im\'edca i lie carner \'favie Y\'e9sunna nahtien se. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Nunteltes ar tulyane se oa ar antane se olla P\'edlato i *n\'f3rec\'e1nonna. \
	
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  T\'e1, \'edre Y\'faras cenne i h\'e9 n\'e1ne n\'e1maina, s\'e1mes inwis ar talle nan i telpemittar *nelequean i h\'e9re *airimoin ar i amy\'e1rain. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Quentes: \'93\'dacarnen \'edre antanen olla faila serce!\'94 Quentelte: \'93Mana ta elmen? Elye cena sanna!\'94 
\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  T\'e1 hantes i telpemittar mir i corda ar oante, ar lendes oa ar lingane inse. \
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 27\

\f3\b0 When morning came, all the chief priests and the elders among the people made a consideration  against Jesus in order to kill him. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  They bound him and led him away and gave him over to Pilate the governor.\
	
\f1\b 3
\f3\b0  Then, when Judas saw that he was being judged, he had a change of mind and brought back the thirty silver pieces to the chief priests and the elders. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  He said: \'93I sinned when I gave over righteous blood!\'94 They said: \'93What is that to us? You see to it!\'94 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  Then he threw the silver pieces into the temple and went off, and he went away and hanged himself.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Mal i h\'e9re *airimor namper i telpemittar ar quenter: \'93Ua l\'e1vina hatitat mir i aire harwe, an nalte *paityale sercen!\'94 Apa carie \'favie *homancanelte tainen i cemnaro resta, ve sapsan\'f3me etteleain. 
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Etta tana n\'f3me anaie estaina \'93Serceresta\'94 tenna aure sina. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  T\'e1 ya n\'e1ne qu\'e9tina ter Yeremia i Eruterc\'e1no n\'e1ne carna nanwa: \'93Ar nampelte i telpemittar *nelequean, i *paityale i neren ye s\'e1me valdierya tulcana, yen i Israelindi tulcane *paityale, ar antanelte tai i cemnaro restan, ve i H\'e9ru canne nin!\'94\
	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus tarne epe i n\'f3rec\'e1no, ar i n\'f3rec\'e1no maquente senna: \'93Ma elye aran Y\'fararon n\'e1?\'94 Y\'e9sus hanquente: \'93Elye quete sa!\'94 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Mal \'edre i h\'e9re *airimor ar i amy\'e1rar quenter i carnelyanes ongweli, uas hanquente. 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Pil\'e1to quente senna: \'93Ma ual hlare ilye i nati yar *vettalte lyenna?\'94 
\f0\b 14
\f2\b0  Ananta uas hanquente senna, l\'e1 erya quettanen. Etta i n\'f3rec\'e1no s\'e1me t\'fara elmenda.\
\

\f1\i\b 6
\f3\b0  But the chief priests took the silver-pieces and said: \'93It is not allowed to throw them into the holy treasury, for they are a payment for blood!\'94 After making a consideration they bought with them the potter's field, as a grave-place for strangers. 
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  Therefore that place has been named \'93Bloodfield\'94 until this day. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  Then [that] which was said through Jeremiah the Prophet was made true: \'93And they took the thirty silver pieces, the payment for the man that had his worth fixed, for whom the Children of Israel fixed a payment, and they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord commanded me!\'94\
	
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  But Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him: \'93Are you king of the Jews?\'94 Jesus answered: \'93You yourself say it!\'94 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  But when the chief priests and the elders said that he had done [/committed] crimes, he did not answer. 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  Then Pilate said to him: \'93Do you not hear all the things that they witness against you?\'94 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  And yet he did not answer him, not with a single word. Therefore the governor had great wonder.\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  A\uc0\u351 arello a\u351 arenna n\'e1ne haime i n\'f3rec\'e1nova lehtie i \u351 angan qu\'e9n i mandollo, i n\'e9r ye mernelte. 
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Mi yana l\'fame enge mandoltasse n\'e9r estaina Varavas, arwa ulca esseo. 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  Etta, apa ocomnelte, Pil\'e1to quente t\'e9na: \'93Man n\'e1 i qu\'e9n ye merilde i lehtuvan len, Varavas hya Y\'e9sus estaina Hristo?\'94 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  An sintes i antaneltes olla *hr\'facennen. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  Ente, \'edre hamnes i hammasse nami\'e9va, verirya mentane senna, qu\'e9tala: \'93Nai nauva munta imbi ly\'e9 ar tana faila n\'e9r, an s\'e1men t\'fara naice s\'edra oloresse pa s\'e9!\'94 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  Mal i h\'e9re *airimor ar i amy\'e1rar *mirquenter i \uc0\u351 angar arcienna Varavas, mal i nancarumnelte Y\'e9sus. 
\f0\b 21
\f2\b0  Hanquentasse i n\'f3rec\'e1no quente t\'e9na: \'93Man im\'edca i atta merilde i lehtuvan lenna?\'94 Quentelte: \'93Varavas!\'94  \
\
	
\f1\i\b 15
\f3\b0  From festival to festival a habit [/custom] of the governor was to release to the crowd a person from the prison, the man that they wanted. 
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  At that time [there] was in prison a man called Barabbas, having an evil name [/reputation]. 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  Therefore, after they gathered, Pilate said to them: \'93Who is the person that you wish I am to release to you, Barabbas or Jesus called Christ?\'94 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  For he knew that they gave him over because of envy. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Furthermore, when he sat on the seat of judgement, his wife sent to him, saying: \'93May there be nothing between you and that righteous man, for I had great pain today in a dream concerning him!\'94 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  But the chief priests and the elders talked the crowds into requesting Barabbas, but that they were to destroy Jesus. 
\f1\b 21
\f3\b0  In answer the governor said to them: \'93Who among the two do you wish that I am to release to you?\'94 They said: \'93Barabbas!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 22
\f2\b0  Pil\'e1to quente t\'e9na: \'93T\'e1 mana caruvan Y\'e9sun ye n\'e1 estaina Hristo?\'94 Illi mici te quenter: \'93Nai nauvas tarwestana!\'94 
\f0\b 23
\f2\b0  Eques: \'93T\'e1 mana ulco ac\'e1ries?\'94 Mal y\'e1melte en ambe: \'93Nai nauvas tarwestana!\'94 \

\f0\b 	24
\f2\b0  \'cdre cennes i poldes care munta a\uc0\u351 ea, mal ambe ron amortie ortumne, Pil\'e1to nampe n\'e9n ar s\'f3ve m\'e1ryat epe i \u351 anga, qu\'e9tala: \'93Uan same c\'e1ma serceo n\'e9r sino! Elde cena sanna!\'94 
\f0\b 25
\f2\b0  Ar hanquentasse i lie quente: \'93Nai sercerya tuluva menna ar h\'ednalmannar!\'94 
\f0\b 26
\f2\b0  T\'e1 leryanes tien Varavas, mal Y\'e9sus r\'edpes ar antane se olla n\'e1ven tarwestaina.\
	
\f0\b 27
\f2\b0  T\'e1 i n\'f3rec\'e1no ohtari taller Y\'e9sus mir i t\'farion ar comyaner i quanda ohtarhosse senna. 
\f0\b 28
\f2\b0  Ar nampelte sello lanneryar ar panyaner sesse culda colla, 
\f0\b 29
\f2\b0  ar carnelte r\'ede neceliva ar panyaner sa caryasse, ar esce formaryasse.\
\

\f1\i\b 22
\f3\b0  Pilate said to them: \'93Then what am I to do to Jesus who is called Christ?\'94 All among them said: \'93Let him be crucified!\'94 
\f1\b 23
\f3\b0  He said: \'93Then what evil has he done?\'94 But they cried still more: \'93Let him be crucified!\'94\
	
\f1\b 24
\f3\b0  When he saw that he could do nothing beneficial, but that sooner an uprising was going to arise, Pilate took water and washed his hands before the crowd, saying: \'93I do not have guilt of the blood of this man! You see to it!\'94 
\f1\b 25
\f3\b0  And in answer the people said: \'93Let his blood come upon us and upon our children!\'94 
\f1\b 26
\f3\b0  Then he freed to them Barabbas, but Jesus he flayed and gave him over to being crucified.\
	
\f1\b 27
\f3\b0  Then the governor's soldiers brought Jesus into the palace, and gathered the entire soldier-host to him. 
\f1\b 28
\f3\b0  And they took from him his clothes and put on him a scarlet [
\f1\b culda,
\f3\b0  golden-red] cloak, 
\f1\b 29
\f3\b0  and they made a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand.\

\f2\i0 \
Ar lantala occaltanta epe se carampelte senna yaiwenen, qu\'e9tala: \'93Aiya, aran Y\'fararon!\'94 
\f0\b 30
\f2\b0  Ar piutanelte senna ar namper i esce ar se-penter caryasse. 
\f0\b 31
\f2\b0  Ar apa yaiwelta senna nampelte oa sello i colla ar panyaner sesse v\'e9re larmaryar, ar tulyaneltes oa n\'e1ven tarwestana.\
	
\f0\b 32
\f2\b0  M\'ed malle hirnelte n\'e9r ho Cir\'e9ne estaina S\'edmon. N\'e9r sina mauyanelte cole tarwerya. 
\f0\b 33
\f2\b0  Ar \'edre t\'falelte n\'f3menna estaina Olya\uc0\u351 a, t\'e1 n\'e1, *Caraxo, 
\f0\b 34
\f2\b0  antanelte sen limpe ostimesse as *s\'e1la, mal apa tyavie sa uas merne suce. 
\f0\b 35
\f2\b0  Apa tarwestie se etsantelte larmaryar hati\'e9nen *\uc0\u351 anwali, 
\f0\b 36
\f2\b0  ar h\'e1mala tasse t\'edraneltes. 
\f0\b 37
\f2\b0  Ente, or carya panyanelte i ongwequetta senna, t\'e9cina: \'93Si n\'e1 Y\'e9sus, aran Y\'fararon!\'94\
\

\f3\i And falling on their knees before him they spoke to him with scorn, saying: \'93Hail, king of the Jews!\'94 
\f1\b 30
\f3\b0  And they spat on him and took the reed and struck him on his head. 
\f1\b 31
\f3\b0  And after their scorn against him, they took away from him the cloak and put on him his own clothes, and they led him away to be crucified.\
	
\f1\b 32
\f3\b0  On the road they found a man for Cyrene called Simon. This man they compelled to carry his cross. 
\f1\b 33
\f3\b0  And when they came to a place called Golgotha, that is, Skull, 
\f1\b 34
\f3\b0  they gave him wine in a mix with gall, but after tasting it he did not want to drink. 
\f1\b 35
\f3\b0  After crucifying him they distributed his garments by throwing lots, 
\f1\b 36
\f3\b0  and sitting there they were watching him. 
\f1\b 37
\f3\b0  Furthermore, over his head they put the accusation [
\f1\b ongwequetta
\f3\b0  = \'93crime-word\'94] against him, written: \'93This is Jesus, king of the Jews!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 38
\f2\b0  T\'e1 pilu atta n\'e1net tarwestane \'f3se, qu\'e9n foryaryasse ar qu\'e9n hyaryaryasse. 
\f0\b 39
\f2\b0  I lahtaner naiquenter senna, p\'e1lala cariltar 
\f0\b 40
\f2\b0  ar qu\'e9tala: \'93Elye ye hatumne i corda undu ar encarastumne sa ter auri nelde, \'e1 rehta imle! Qui nalye Eruo Yondo, tula undu i tarwello!\'94 
\f0\b 41
\f2\b0  M\'ed imya l\'e9 y\'fa i h\'e9re *airimor as i parmangolmor caramper senna yaiwenen ar quenter: 
\f0\b 42
\f2\b0  \'93Exeli erehties; inse uas pole rehta! N\'e1se Isra\'e9lo aran; lava sen s\'ed tule undu i tarwello ar savuvalme sesse! 
\f0\b 43
\f2\b0  Ap\'e1nies estelya Erusse; s\'ed lava h\'e9n etelehta se qui h\'e9 mere se, an quentes: Nanye Eruo Yondo!\'94 
\f0\b 44
\f2\b0  M\'ed imya l\'e9 y\'fa i pilur tarwestane \'f3se naityaner se.\
	
\f0\b 45
\f2\b0  I enquea l\'famello mornie lantane or i quanda n\'f3re, tenna i nertea l\'fame. 
\f0\b 46
\f2\b0  *Os i nertea l\'fame Y\'e9sus y\'e1me taura \'f3manen, qu\'e9tala: \'93E\ul li, eli, lema savaht\'e1ni?\'94\ulnone , ta n\'e1: \'93Ainonya, Ainonya, mana castalya hehtien ni?\'94\
\

\f1\i\b 38
\f3\b0  Then two robbers were crucified with him, one at his rigth and one at his left. 
\f1\b 39
\f3\b0  [Those] that passed by blasphemed against him, shaking their heads 
\f1\b 40
\f3\b0  and saying: \'93You who were going to throw the temple down and re-build it in [
\f1\b ter
\f3\b0  = through] three days, save yourself! If you are God's Son, come down from the cross!\'94 
\f1\b 41
\f3\b0  In the same manner also the chief priests and the scribes spoke to him with scorn and said: 
\f1\b 42
\f3\b0  \'93Others he has saves; himself he cannot save! He is king of Israel; let him now come down from the cross and we will believe in him! 
\f1\b 43
\f3\b0  He has put his hope in God; now let \ul him\ulnone  [= God] rescue him if he wants him, for he said: I am God's Son!\'94 
\f1\b 44
\f3\b0  In the same manner also the robbers crucified with him abused him.\
	
\f1\b 45
\f3\b0  
\f2\i0 From
\f3\i  the sixth hour darkness fell over the entire land, until the ninth hour. 
\f1\b 46
\f3\b0  Aroud the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a mighty voice, saying: \'93E\ul li, eli, lema sabachtani?\'94\ulnone , that is: \'93My God, my God, what is your reason for forsaking me?\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 47
\f2\b0  \'cdre hlasselte si, queneli im\'edca i tarner tasse quenter: \'93N\'e9r sina y\'e1la El\'eda!\'94 
\f0\b 48
\f2\b0  Ar mi imya l\'fa qu\'e9n mici te nampe hwan ar quante sa s\'e1ra limpenen ar panyane sa escesse ar l\'e1ve sen suce. 
\f0\b 49
\f2\b0  Mal i exi quenter: \'93Lava sen n\'e1ve! Alve cene qui Elia tule rehtien se!\'94 
\f0\b 50
\f2\b0  Mal Y\'e9sus ata y\'e1me taura \'f3manen ar effirne. \
	
\f0\b 51
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! i fanwa i cordasse n\'e1ne narcana mir atta, telmello talmanna, ar i cemen palle, ar i ondor n\'e1ner \uc0\u351 ance. 
\f0\b 52
\f2\b0  Ar i noiri n\'e1ner pantane, ar rimbe hroali i lorne airion n\'e1ner ortane, 
\f0\b 53
\f2\b0  ar t\'falala et i noirillon apa anes ortana t\'falelte mir i aire osto ar tanner inte rimbain. 
\f0\b 54
\f2\b0  Mal i *tuxantur ar \'f3se i t\'edraner Y\'e9sus, \'edre cennelte i *cempalie ar i nati martala, n\'e1ner ita ruhtaine, qu\'e9tala: \'93N\'e9r sina \'e9 n\'e1ne Eruo Yondo!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b 47
\f3\b0  When they heard this, some among [those] who stood there said: \'93This man is calling Elijah!\'94 
\f1\b 48
\f3\b0  And in the same moment one among them took a sponge and filled it with sour wine and put it on a reed and let him drink. 
\f1\b 49
\f3\b0  But the others said: \'93Let him be! Let us see if Elijah comes to save him!\'94 
\f1\b 50
\f3\b0  But Jesus again cried with a mighty voice and expired.\
	
\f1\b 51
\f3\b0  And behold! the curtain in the temple was torn into two, from top to bottom, and the earth shook, and the rocks were split. 
\f1\b 52
\f3\b0  And the tombs were opened, and many bodies of the sleeping holy ones were raised, 
\f1\b 52
\f3\b0  and coming out of the tombs after he was raised they came into the holy city and showed themselves to many. 
\f1\b 54
\f3\b0  But the centurion and with him [those] that were watching Jesus, when they saw the earthquake and the things happening, were extremely terrified, saying: \'93This man was indeed God's Son!\'94\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 55 
\f2\b0 Enger tasse rimbe nisseli t\'edrala hairallo, i hilyaner Y\'e9sus Alileallo *vevien sen. 
\f0\b 56
\f2\b0  Mici t\'e9 n\'e1ner Mar\'eda Mahtal\'e9ne, y\'fa Mar\'eda amil Y\'e1covo ar Y\'f3sefo, ar i amil yondoron Severaio. \
	
\f0\b 57
\f2\b0  \'cdre \uc0\u351 inye lantane, t\'fale tar l\'e1ra n\'e9r Arima\u351 eallo estaina Y\'f3sef, ye y\'fa n\'e1ne Y\'e9sus hildo. 
\f0\b 58
\f2\b0  N\'e9r sina lende Pil\'e1tonna ar arcane Y\'e9suo hroa. T\'e1 Pil\'e1to antane i canwa, ar anes antana sen. 
\f0\b 59
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'f3sef nampe i hroa ar sa-vaitanes poica *p\'e1\uc0\u351 enen, 
\f0\b 60
\f2\b0  ar sa-panyanes vinya noiriryasse, ya n\'f3vo carnes ve hr\'f3ta i ondosse. Apa *peltanes sar epe i noirio fennanna oantes. 
\f0\b 61
\f2\b0  Mal Mar\'eda Mahtal\'e9ne ar i hyana Mar\'eda enger en tasse, h\'e1mala epe i noire.\
\

\f1\i\b 55
\f3\b0  There were there many women watching from afar, [those] who followed Jesus from Galilee to serve him. 
\f1\b 56
\f3\b0  Among them were Mary Magdalene, also Mary mother of Jacob and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.\
	
\f1\b 57
\f3\b0  When evening fell, [there] came thither a rich man from Arimathea called Josef, who also was a disciple of Jesus. 
\f1\b 58
\f3\b0  This man went to Pilate and asked for Jesus' body. Then Pilate gave the order, and it was given to him. 
\f1\b 59
\f3\b0  And Joseph took the body and wrapped it in pure linen, 
\f1\b 60
\f3\b0  and he put it in a new tomb, which beforehand he made as an artifical cave [
\f1\b hr\'f3ta
\f3\b0 ] in the rock. After he rolled a stone to before the door of the tomb he went off. 
\f1\b 61
\f3\b0  But Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were still there, sitting before the tomb.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b 62
\f2\b0  I hilyala auresse, ya n\'e1ne apa i Manwie, i h\'e9re *airimor ar i Farisar ocomner epe Pil\'e1to, 
\f0\b 63
\f2\b0  qu\'e9tala: \'93Heru, enay\'e1lielme ya tana n\'e9r huruiva quente \'edre en anes coirea: 'Apa auri nelde nauvan enortana.' 
\f0\b 64
\f2\b0  Etta \'e1 anta i canwa, ar i noire nauva varyaina tenna i neldea aure, pustien hildoryar ho tulie ar pilie se ar quetie i lienna: 'Anes ortana qualinallon!', ar i m\'e9tima loima nauva olca epe i minya!\'94 
\f0\b 65
\f2\b0  Pil\'e1to quente t\'e9na: \'93Samilde cundor. Mena ar \'e1sa care ve varna ve istalde!\'94 
\f0\b 66
\f2\b0  Lendelte ar carner i noire varna *lihti\'e9nen i ondo ar pani\'e9nen i cundor tasse.\
\

\f1\i\b 62
\f3\b0  On the following day, which was after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered before Pilate, 
\f1\b 63
\f3\b0  saying: \'93Lord, we have recalled [that] which this man of lies said when he was still alive: 'After three days I shall be raised again.' 
\f1\b 64
\f3\b0  Therefore give the order, and the tomb will be protected until the third day, to stop his disciples from coming and stealing him and saying to the people: 'He was raised from the dead!', and the last error will be worse than the first!\'94 
\f1\b 65
\f3\b0  Pilate said to them: \'93You have guards. Go and make it as safe as you know!\'94 
\f1\b 66
\f3\b0  They went and made the tomb safe by sealing the stone and by putting the guards there.\

\f2\i0 \

\f0\b RANTA 28
\f2\b0  \
Apa i *sendare, \'e1rasse i minya auresse i otsolo, Mar\'eda Mahtal\'e9ne ar i hyana Mar\'eda t\'faler cenien i noire. 
\f0\b 2
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! martane hoa *cempalie, an i H\'e9ruo vala t\'fale undu menello ar panyane oa i ondo, ar hamnes sasse. 
\f0\b 3
\f2\b0  Ilcerya n\'e1ne ve \'edta, ar larmaryar n\'e1ner lossie. 
\f0\b 4
\f2\b0  Ruci\'e9nen sello i cundor paller ar n\'e1ner ve qualine. \

\f0\b 5
\f2\b0  Mal i vala quente i nissennar: \'93\'c1vas ruce, an istan i cesteaste Y\'e9sus, ye n\'e1ne tarwestana. 
\f0\b 6
\f2\b0  Uas sisse, an anaies ortana, ve quentes. Tula, cena i n\'f3me yasse caines! 
\f0\b 7
\f2\b0  Ar mena linti\'e9nen ar nyara hildoryain in anaies ortana qualinallon, ar y\'e9! m\'e9nas epe le mir Alilea; tasse cenuvaldes. Y\'e9, any\'e1rien lent!\'94\
	
\f0\b 8
\f2\b0  Ar linti\'e9nen autala i noirillo, arwa ruci\'e9no ar t\'fara alasseo, nornette ta-nyarien hildoryain. 
\f0\b 9
\f2\b0  Ar y\'e9! Y\'e9sus velde tu ar quente: \'93Hara m\'e1riesse!\'94 T\'falette senna ar nampet talyat ar lantanet undu epe se. 
\f0\b 19
\f2\b0  T\'e1 Y\'e9sus quente t\'fana: \'93\'c1va ruce! Mena, nyara h\'e1nonyain, menieltan mir Alilea, ar tasse cenuvalte ni!\'94\
\

\f1\i\b CHAPTER 28\

\f3\b0 After the day of rest, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the tomb. 
\f1\b 2
\f3\b0  And behold! there occurred a great earthquake, for the angel of the Lord came down from heaven and put away the stone, and he sat on it. 
\f1\b 3
\f0\i0  
\f3\i\b0 His appearance was like lightening [
\f1\b \'edta
\f3\b0  = flash], and his garments were snow-white. 
\f1\b 4
\f3\b0  For the fear of him the guards shook and were like dead. 
\f1\b 5
\f3\b0  But the angel said to the women: \'93Do not fear, for I know that you are seeking Jesus, who was crucified. 
\f1\b 6
\f3\b0  He is not here, for he has been raised, as he said. Come, see the place where he lay! 
\f1\b 7
\f3\b0  And go with speed and tell his disciples that he has been raised from the dead, and behold! he is going before you into Galilee; there you will see him. Behold, I have told you [dual]!\'94\
	
\f1\b 8
\f3\b0  And quickly going away from the grave, having fear and great joy, they [dual] ran to tell that to the disciples. 
\f1\b 9
\f3\b0  And behold! Jesus met them [dual] and said: \'93Good day!\'94 [lit. \'93Remain in goodness\'94, a standard Quenya greeting]. They [dual] came to him and seized his feet and fell down  before him. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Then Jesus said to them: \'93Do not be afraid! Go, tell my brothers, for them to go into Galilee, and there they will see me!\'94\

\f2\i0 \
	
\f0\b 11
\f2\b0  Mal apa lendette, y\'e9, queneli i cundoron lender mir i osto ar nyarne i h\'e9ra *airimon pa ilqua ya martanelyane. 
\f0\b 12
\f2\b0  Ar yomeniesse as i amy\'e1rar carnelte \'favie, ar antanelte f\'e1rea n\'f3te telpemittal\'edva i ohtarin 
\f0\b 13
\f2\b0  ar quenter: \'93Queta: 'Hildoryar t\'faler i l\'f3misse ar pilder se \'edre anelme lorne.' 
\f0\b 14 
\f2\b0 Ar qui si tule i n\'f3rec\'e1no hlarunnar, elme quetuvar senna, ar elde \'e1va ruce!\'94 
\f0\b 15
\f2\b0  Ar nampelte i telpemittar ar carner ve n\'e1ne tien peantana, ar quetie sina anaie vintaina mici Y\'farar tenna aure sina. \
	
\f0\b 16
\f2\b0  Mal i hildor minque lender mir Alilea, i orontenna yasse Y\'e9sus quente i velumnes te, 
\f0\b 17
\f2\b0  ar \'edre cenneltes, lantanes undu epe se, mal queneli \'faner tance i saviesse. 
\f0\b 18
\f2\b0  Ar Y\'e9sus lende t\'e9na ar carampe t\'e9na, qu\'e9tala: \'93Ilya h\'e9re anaie nin antana mi menel cemenye. 
\f0\b 19 
\f2\b0 Etta \'e1 lelya ar cara ilye n\'f3ri hildoli, sumbala te m\'ed esse i Ataro ar i Yondo ar i Aire Feo, 
\f0\b 20
\f2\b0  peantala te care ilye i nati yar inye canne len. Ar y\'e9, inye ea aselde ilye i r\'ed tenna tyel i rando!\'94\
\

\f3\i 	
\f1\b 11
\f3\b0  But after they [dual] went, behold, some of the guards went into the city and told the chief prist about everything that had happened. 
\f1\b 12
\f3\b0  And at a meeting with the elders they made consideration, and they gave a sufficient number of silver-pieces to the soldiers 
\f1\b 13
\f3\b0  and said: \'93Say: 'His disciples came in the night and stole him while we were asleep.' 
\f1\b 14
\f3\b0  And if this comes to the ears of the governor, we shall speak to him, and you do not be afraid!\'94 
\f1\b 15
\f3\b0  And they took the silver-pieces and did as they were instructed, and this saying has been spread among [the] Jews until this day.\
	
\f1\b 16
\f3\b0  But the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus said that he was going to meet them, 
\f1\b 17
\f3\b0  and when they saw him, they fell down before him, but some among them were not firm in the faith. 
\f1\b 18
\f3\b0  And Jesus went to them and spoke to them, saying: \'93All lordship has been given me in heaven and earth. 
\f1\b 19
\f3\b0  Therefore go and make all nations disciples, baptizing them in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, 
\f1\b 20
\f3\b0  teaching them to do all the things that I commanded you. And behold, I am with you all the days until the end of the age!\'94\
\pard\pardeftab709\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f2\i0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd23\expndtw115
\
}